Title: Beyond Self-Play and Scale: A Behavior Benchmark for Generalization in Autonomous Driving

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.10034v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 03:25:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 41

Markdown Content:
# Beyond Self-Play and Scale: A Behavior Benchmark for Generalization in Autonomous Driving 

Aron Distelzweig 1 Faris Janjoš 2 Andreas Look 3 Anna Rothenhäusler 1 Daniel Jost 1

Oliver Scheel 2 Raghu Rajan 1 Daphne Cornelisse 4 Eugene Vinitsky 4 Joschka Boedecker 11 University of Freiburg 2 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence  

> 3

Coburg University of Applied Sciences 4 New York University 

Abstract 

Recent Autonomous Driving (AD) works such as GigaFlow and PufferDrive have unlocked Reinforcement Learning (RL) at scale as a training strategy for driving policies. Yet such policies remain disconnected from established benchmarks, leaving the performance of large-scale RL for driving on standardized evaluations unknown. We present BehaviorBench – a comprehensive test suite that closes this gap along three axes: Evaluation , Complexity , and Behavior Diversity . In terms of Evaluation , we provide an interface connecting PufferDrive to nuPlan, which, for the first time, enables policies trained via RL at scale to be evaluated on an established planning benchmark for autonomous driving. Complementar-ily, we offer an evaluation framework that allows planners to be benchmarked directly inside the PufferDrive simulation, at a fraction of the time. Regarding 

Complexity , we observe that today’s standardized benchmarks are so simple that near-perfect scores are achievable by straight lane following with collision checking. We extract a meaningful, interaction-rich split from the Waymo Open Motion Dataset (WOMD) on which strong performance is impossible without multi-agent reasoning. Lastly, we address Behavior Diversity . Existing bench-marks commonly evaluate planners against a single rule-based traffic model, the Intelligent Driver Model (IDM). We provide a diverse suite of interactive traffic agents to stress-test policies under heterogeneous behaviors, beyond just using IDM. Overall, our benchmarking analysis uncovers the following insight: de-spite learning interactive behaviors in an emergent manner, policies trained via pure self-play under standard reward functions overfit to their training opponents and fail to generalize to other traffic agent behaviors. Building on this obser-vation, we propose a hybrid planner that combines a PPO policy with a rule-based planner, providing a baseline for our new benchmark. Code is available at 

https://github.com/boschresearch/behavior-bench/ .

1 Introduction 

The ability to train policies at scale is unlocking new capabilities in Autonomous Driving (AD) [Cusumano-Towner et al., 2025]. Reinforcement Learning (RL), in particular, promises to discover policies that go beyond the limitations of both rule-based and imitation-learned planners by optimizing directly for driving objectives. However, it requires millions of environment interactions, far exceeding what current simulators can deliver within a reasonable amount of time. Existing simulation platforms each address a different aspect of AD research, yet none enable large-scale RL. nuPlan [Caesar et al., 2022] targets Imitation Learning (IL) and planner evaluation, CARLA [Doso-vitskiy et al., 2017] provides photorealistic sensor rendering, and Waymax [Gulino et al., 2023] accelerates multi-agent simulation but still falls short of the throughput required to train policies at scale.  

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.10034v1 [cs.RO] 11 May 2026 nuPlan PufferDrive
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 10 5
> Steps / second
> ~9000×
> Established benchmarks

## ?(a) Evaluation 1 3 6 12 15  

> Number of IDM proposals
> 65
> 70
> 75
> 80
> 85
> 90
> 95
> nuPlan Val14 score
> DTPP
> PlanTF
> CaRL
> GigaFlow
> (best reported score)
> 1
> 3
> 6
> 12
> 15

(b) Benchmark complexity Existing benchmarks    

> Single reactive behavior (IDM)
> BehaviorBench (ours)
> Diverse reactive behaviors
> Cautious Aggressive

(c) Traffic behavior diversity 

Figure 1: Three limitations of current planner benchmarks. (a) Evaluation. PufferDrive achieves roughly 9000× higher step rates than nuPlan, making large-scale RL training practical for the first time. Without a matching evaluation framework, however, policies trained this way remain isolated from established benchmarks. (b) Benchmark complexity. On the widely used nuPlan Val14 benchmark, a simple rule-based planner combining lane following with collision checking is already sufficient to achieve competitive scores: with only 15 IDM proposals, it clearly surpasses state-of-the-art learned planners such as CaRL [Jaeger et al., 2025b], PlanTF [Cheng et al., 2024] and DTPP [Huang et al., 2024]. This shows that the benchmark barely measures interactive or negotiation capabilities and systematically overestimates true planner performance. (c) Traffic behavior diversity. Existing benchmarks evaluate almost exclusively against a single reactive traffic model (IDM), whose agents are predictable, cooperative, and uniform (top). Our framework instead introduces a heterogeneous set of traffic agents (bottom), enabling, for the first time, a cross-agent evaluation that distinguishes genuine generalization from overfitting to a single behavioral regime. A notable exception is PufferDrive [Cornelisse et al., 2025], which was recently introduced to break through this barrier. By combining a batched simulation architecture with a highly optimized engine written in C [Suarez, 2024], it achieves orders-of-magnitude higher throughput than prior simulators (Fig. 1a), making large-scale training of driving policies practical for the first time. Yet speed alone is not enough. Without standardized benchmarks, reproducible evaluation protocols, and compatibility with established evaluation suites, policies trained in PufferDrive exist in isolation – they cannot be compared against the state of the art, and their true capabilities remain unknown. A structured comparison of these simulation frameworks, highlighting the trade-offs between simu-lator capabilities and computational throughput, is provided in Appendix A, to which we refer the reader for an exhaustive discussion of relevant simulation environments. 

In this work, we close this gap by introducing the first standardized benchmark and evaluation framework for PufferDrive. Our framework supports evaluation directly within PufferDrive and provides an interface for evaluating PufferDrive-trained policies on established benchmarks such as nuPlan [Caesar et al., 2022] and interPlan [Hallgarten et al., 2024], allowing direct comparison with prior work. Crucially, however, we go beyond mere compatibility and address benchmark complexity . We argue that the existing benchmarks themselves are insufficient. The most widely-used nuPlan Val14 benchmark [Dauner et al., 2023], can be largely solved by lane-following combined with simple collision-checking (Fig. 1b). Prior work has demonstrated that even a small set of rule-based proposals suffices to achieve strong performance [Dauner et al., 2023, Distelzweig et al., 2025]. This reveals a fundamental problem – planners can obtain high scores without reasoning about interactions, anticipating the behavior of surrounding agents, or negotiating in congested traffic situations. This problem is compounded by a second, equally critical limitation: traffic behavior diversity 

(Fig. 1c). Most existing benchmarks evaluate planners against a single reactive traffic model, the rule-based Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) [Treiber et al., 2000]. IDM agents follow their lane, react through simple car-following dynamics, and rarely exhibit the diverse, sometimes adversarial behaviors encountered in real traffic. As a consequence, benchmark scenarios become artificially easy – surrounding traffic is predictable and cooperative, and a planner may appear robust simply because it has adapted to the narrow assumptions of this one traffic model. This issue is particularly pronounced for RL-trained planners, which are not only evaluated but often trained against the same traffic model. Throughout training, the policy continuously interacts with this single behavioral model and can 2readily overfit to its regularities, learning to exploit IDM-specific dynamics rather than acquiring strategies that transfer to other behaviors. Evaluation under the same behavioral regime therefore fundamentally cannot completely assess generalization. interPlan [Hallgarten et al., 2024] attempted to address the first issue by augmenting nuPlan with handcrafted out-of-distribution scenarios. Although a step in the right direction, these scenarios are limited in both scale and diversity. They cover only a small number of maps and traffic configurations and still rely on the same underlying IDM traffic behavior. We address both shortcomings simul-taneously. First, we construct a substantially larger and more challenging benchmark based on the Waymo Open Motion Dataset (WOMD) [Ettinger et al., 2021]. Rather than curating a handful of edge cases, we systematically extract a collection of 1,000 highly interactive situations, including dense traffic, merges, blocked lanes, unprotected turns, and other complex multi-agent interactions, in which simple lane following is no longer sufficient. To succeed, a planner must actively reason about surrounding agents and adapt its behavior. Second, we move beyond the single-traffic-model paradigm by introducing a diverse set of traffic agents with distinct driving styles and interaction patterns. Some agents yield cautiously while others drive aggressively and force interactions. Evaluating planners across this spectrum of traffic dynamics allows us, for the first time, to measure whether a policy genuinely generalizes or merely overfits to a particular behavioral regime. We validate our framework through extensive experiments and find that planners achieving strong results on existing benchmarks frequently fail in our interaction-heavy scenarios and under alternative traffic agents. These results demonstrate that current benchmarks substantially overestimate planner capabilities and are blind to a critical dimension of robustness. Our contribution is a comprehensive benchmarking framework for planner evaluation in PufferDrive, consisting of the following components: • The first comprehensive evaluation interface for planners in PufferDrive, including a dedicated PufferDrive–nuPlan interface that, for the first time, enables at-scale trained RL policies to be evaluated inside the established nuPlan simulator, bridging the gap between at-scale RL training and standardized planner benchmarking. • Two curated 1k scenario splits based on WOMD that systematically cover a broad spectrum of traffic situations, from routine driving to highly interactive scenarios. • A diverse suite of traffic agents enabling comprehensive cross-agent evaluation and expos-ing planner behavior under heterogeneous and realistic interaction patterns. Using this framework, we derive the following findings and methodologies: • Empirical evidence that self-play RL agents trained at-scale fail to generalize to unseen traffic agents. • A hybrid planner that leverages the reliability of rule-based approaches and establishes a strong baseline on our benchmark. 

2 BehaviorBench 

We introduce BehaviorBench , a benchmark built around three components. Sec. 2.1 describes the 

evaluation interface and its interface to nuPlan, which for the first time enables at-scale RL-trained policies to be evaluated on an established planning benchmark. Sec. 2.2 introduces two curated 1k scenario splits that jointly cover routine and highly interactive driving situations. Sec. 2.3 presents our diverse suite of traffic agents that measures planner performance under heterogeneous and realistic interaction patterns. Finally, Sec. 2.4 introduces our hybrid planner. 

2.1 Evaluation Interface Simulation environment. PufferDrive is a high-throughput driving simulator built on a vectorized C backend, originally designed purely as a training environment without support for evaluating trained policies against independent traffic models. Our framework closes this gap. Each scenario contains up to 128 agents. The simulator exposes ego-centric observations comprising the ego state (R7), the 31 nearest surrounding agents ( R31 ×8), and 128 visible road segments ( R128 ×7). Actions 3Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3 Scenario 4    

> Interactive1k Random1k
> Ego Vehicle Surrounding Agents Goal Expert Trajectory

Figure 2: Qualitative comparison of our Interactive1k and Random1k splits. Four representative scenarios from each split, showing the ego vehicle (red), surrounding agents (blue), the ego goal (green), and the expert trajectory (red). Interactive1k (top row) is dominated by dense urban situations while Random1k (bottom row) reflects simpler cases. are available either as a discrete acceleration–steering combination or as continuous two-dimensional control commands, integrated through a kinematic bicycle model at ∆t = 0 .1 s. Vulnerable road users (pedestrians and cyclists) are treated as non-controllable participants that replay their logged expert trajectories. Agents are removed upon reaching a terminal condition: goal completion, leaving the drivable area (off-road), or collision. 

Evaluation protocol. In our proposed evaluation framework, for every scenario, a single agent is designated as the ego and controlled by the planner, while the remaining agents are controlled by a traffic agent model. An episode terminates as soon as the ego reaches its goal, collides with another agent, or leaves the drivable area. Our framework implements nuPlan’s AbstractPlanner interface, allowing any PufferDrive planner to be evaluated under nuPlan’s simulation and its official metrics suite. We additionally support interPlan evaluation. This compatibility enables direct comparison with prior work on both benchmarks. 

Benchmark Score. To quantify overall planner performance, we combine three task-critical out-come indicators and three behavior scores into a single per-scenario value in [0 , 1] . The outcome terms are combined multiplicatively, while the behavior terms are aggregated as a weighted sum Score scenario =  1 − I[AF-Col ]   1 − I[Off-Road ] I[Goal ]

| {z } 

> outcome indicator ∈ { 0,1}

·  wcmf Scmf + walign Salign + wctr Sctr 

| {z }  

> behavior score ∈[0 ,1]

,

(1) with weights wcmf = 0 .2, walign = 0 .5, and wctr = 0 .3. Indicators I[·] ∈ { 0, 1} mark whether the ego caused an At-Fault collision (AF-Col), left the drivable area (Off-Road), or reached the goal during the scenario. The multiplicative formulation enforces that all three outcome criteria must be satisfied as failure in any one collapses the score to zero. Within successful scenarios, the weighted sum rewards comfort ( wcmf ), lane-alignment ( walign ) and well-centered ( wctr ) driving. In summary, our score jointly captures whether the drive succeeded and how well it was executed. We report the mean across N scenarios as: Score = 1

> N

PNn=1 Score (n)

> scenario

. Detailed explanation of subscores are in Appendix B. 

2.2 Evaluation Splits 

Following existing data-driven simulators [Caesar et al., 2022, Gulino et al., 2023], we initialize scenarios from real-world driving logs. We leverage the WOMD, traditionally used for open-loop 

4evaluation, as a source of initial conditions for the closed-loop evaluation of driving policies, and filter their interaction-rich recordings to construct challenging scenarios. This is motivated by the observation that widely used planning benchmarks such as nuPlan Val14 [Dauner et al., 2023] are comparatively easy: as shown in Fig. 1b, even a small number of IDM proposals is sufficient to essentially solve them, leaving little headroom to distinguish competing planners. We curate an 

Interactive and a Random split of 1,000 scenarios each from the WOMD validation set. Qualitative examples from both splits are shown in Fig. 2, with additional examples in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11. We define an interactivity score Sint ∈ [0 , 1] to select the most challenging scenarios. The score is a weighted sum of normalized components, scaled by a lane-change multiplier 

Sint = λlane 

X

> i

wi · min 

 ci

τi

, 1



, (2) where each component ci captures a distinct aspect of scenario difficulty and is clipped to [0 , 1] via a normalization threshold τi. The lane-change multiplier λlane take the value 1.0 if reaching the goal requires a lane change or turn, and 0.5 otherwise. The components ci are: number of unique agents whose ground-truth trajectories intersect with the ego’s ground-truth trajectory, ego acceleration and steering changes, number of simulation steps where the ego’s time-to-collision with an agent falls below 3 s, number of agents within a 40 m radius and distance to the ego’s goal. We provide more details in Sec. C. We select the 1,000 scenarios with the highest Sint to form the Interactive1k split . The weights wi and normalization thresholds τi can be found in Tab. 6. To complement the Interactive1k split and retain coverage of the broader driving distribution, we additionally construct a 

Random1k split by uniformly sampling 1,000 scenarios from the WOMD validation set. 

2.3 Traffic Agents 

Unlike most existing benchmarks, which are limited to a single reactive traffic model, we provide a heterogeneous set of reactive agents. Each agent model is described in detail below. 

Intelligent Driver Model (IDM). A rule-based model [Treiber et al., 2000] that computes accelera-tion based on the current velocity, desired speed, and distance to the leading vehicle as 

dv dt = a

"

1 −

 vv0

δ

−

 s∗

s

2#

. (3) Intuitively, the policy accelerates with a unless the velocity is already close to the target speed v0 or the leading vehicle is within the safety margin s∗. Lateral guidance follows lane centerlines. Our choice of parameters is listed in Tab. 11. 

Conditioned PPO. A decentralized policy πcθ trained with Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [Schulman et al., 2017] and self-play, i.e. controlling all agents in a scene simultaneously via pa-rameter sharing. Network architecture details are provided in Sec. D. Following GigaFlow [Cusumano-Towner et al., 2025], we train the policy with a complex reward and reward conditioning , exposing the reward weights as an input to the network rather than optimizing against a fixed reward. For every episode, each agent samples a ten-dimensional weight vector c ∼ p(c), and the PPO reward is assembled from those weights (reward function in Appendix E, training distribution in Appendix F). Because c is appended to the observation, the policy learns to map each coefficient setting to the behavior optimal under that reward , yielding a continuous family of driving styles within the same parameters θ. At evaluation time, fixing c to any target point within the sampling range determin-istically selects the associated behavior. We exploit this to construct three traffic agents differing only in c, namely Aggressive , Normal , and Cautious , plus a round-robin mixture so a single scene can contain all three styles. Coefficient values are listed in Tab. 10. These three profiles are merely representative samples of a continuum, since any point in the sampling range elicits a corresponding behavior, and the same trained policy can in principle instantiate an unbounded family of traffic agents at no additional training cost. 

PPO. In addition to the reward conditioned network, we train a network without the coefficient vector as input and with a simple reward, we provide more details on the reward in Appendix E. 5Traffic Agents Planner IDM PPO SMART Expert Aggressive                                                                                    

> πaggr
> θ
> Normal
> πnorm
> θ
> Cautious
> πcaut
> θ
> Mix
> {πaggr
> θ, π norm
> θ, π caut
> θ}
> Interactive1k
> IDM 15.05 20.52 15.70 12.13 19.62 19.24 12.44 16.37 PDM 23.99 29.06 30.43 20.60 33.98 29.55 16.54 24.55 PPO 46.69 59.53 48.50 38.81 58.44 54.05 44.34 51.46 SMART 27.72 33.29 36.20 37.65 34.86 33.20 21.49 29.51 PDM+PPO (Ours) 48.49 59.37 54.09 41.66 63.97 61.07 47.60 56.71
> Random1k
> IDM 55.22 58.91 52.77 50.65 57.30 55.16 53.61 55.58 PDM 63.67 66.79 60.86 56.67 66.01 62.35 57.68 61.13 PPO 58.77 64.03 56.46 53.09 63.02 60.50 56.84 59.88 SMART 47.71 48.01 46.13 49.59 47.52 47.10 42.79 45.63 PDM+PPO (Ours) 65.82 71.21 64.42 61.32 72.04 68.25 65.39 68.46

Table 1: Benchmark scores across traffic agents on Interactive1k and Random1k. Each column corresponds to a traffic agent type, and each row to a planner. Scores are computed according to Eq. 1 and scaled by 100. The best result in each column is shown in bold , and the second-best result is underlined. 

SMART. An autoregressive decoder-only motion prediction model [Wu et al., 2024] that ranked 1 st 

on the Waymo Open Sim Agents Challenge 2024. We use the 1-million-parameter variant, trained via behavior cloning on the WOMD training set. SMART jointly predicts trajectories for all agents in a scene by tokenizing motion into a learned codebook of primitives, where each token represents 0.5 s of movement. At each rollout step, the model predicts the next token for every agent simultaneously, the corresponding 0.5 s of motion is then executed in simulation before the next prediction step. 

Expert (Log-Replay). Each agent replays its recorded ground-truth trajectory from WOMD. Because replay is open-loop, traffic does not react to the ego vehicle’s actions. 

2.4 PDM+PPO: Bridging Rule-based and RL Planners 

We introduce a hybrid planner that combines a learned PPO policy with a rule-based component. For the latter, we adopt the Predictive Driver Model (PDM-Closed) [Dauner et al., 2023], winner of the nuPlan Challenge 2023. PDM predicts surrounding agents under a constant-velocity assumption over a 4 s horizon, generates 15 IDM proposals with varying target velocities, scores each by traffic-rule compliance, progress, and comfort, and executes the best-scoring trajectory. By design, PDM cannot perform lane changes and therefore tends to behave overly conservatively. Our hybrid planner couples PDM with the PPO policy from Sec. 2.3. At each step, IDM proposals are generated and scored as in PDM, and if all receive a score of zero (every candidate either causes a collision, leaves the drivable area, or fails to make progress), control is delegated to PPO. The PPO policy is trained with a simple reward covering only collision avoidance, off-road avoidance, and goal completion, which requires almost no tuning but captures only high-level driving, ignoring behavioral aspects such as comfort and lane alignment, and tends to overfit to the training opponents. To mitigate both issues, rather than executing the PPO action directly, we select its top-K actions and roll each out for 1 s under constant-velocity predictions of the surrounding agents, scoring the resulting trajectories with Eq. 1. This switching mechanism preserves PDM’s safety in routine situations while leveraging the more assertive PPO policy when PDM cannot identify a valid maneuver. Details are provided in Appendix H. 

3 Experimental Results 

Benchmark results. Tab. 1 reports results on our scenario splits. Excluding our hybrid planner, the two splits induce contrasting rankings: PPO achieves the highest final score against every traffic agent on Interactive1k, while PDM dominates on Random1k. PDM’s rule-based design yields safe, conservative trajectories that suffice in routine driving but fail to resolve situations requiring active negotiation, as confirmed by its sharp goal-completion increase from Interactive1k to Random1k in Fig. 3. PPO, trained with a goal-completion reward, favors assertive maneuvering that pays off in interactive scenes but offers no advantage in routine traffic. SMART sits in between, similarly 6IDM        

> Goal
> Comfort
> Center
> Alignment
> Lane
> Alignment
> Off-Road
> At-Fault
> Collision
> SMART PPO Expert Aggressive Normal Cautious Mix
> PDM
> PPO
> SMART
> PDM+PPO
> (Ours)
> Planner
> Traffic Agents
> Interactive1k Random1k

Figure 3: Planner performance across traffic agents and benchmark splits. Each radar plot shows the six core metrics, At-Fault Collision, Off-Road, Goal completion, Comfort, Center Alignment, and Lane Alignment, for a single (planner, traffic agent) combination. Rows correspond to the four planners and columns to the eight traffic agents. All axes are oriented such that the outer ring corresponds to the best observed value, with At-Fault Collision and Off-Road inverted. Each metric is independently min-max normalized across both splits and all (planner, traffic agent) cells, so axis ranges are directly comparable across the entire grid. Within each cell, the solid filled polygon shows performance on Interactive1k and the dashed polygon shows performance on Random1k. Method Score ↑ Subscores ↑                                                                                 

> No-Col. TTC Making Progress Progress along route ratio Comfort Drivable Direction Speed
> nuPlan Val14 [Dauner et al., 2023] PDM [Dauner et al., 2023] 92.13 97.90 93.83 99.11 90.26 94.72 99.46 99.96 99.83
> DiffusionPlanner [Zheng et al., 2025] 82.80 ––––––––PPO 67.24 91.46 62.52 99.11 92.26 39.18 99.19 92.13 93.76 PDM+PPO (Ours) 92.49 98.39 93.11 99.37 91.12 91.95 99.55 99.51 99.79
> interPlan [Hallgarten et al., 2024] PDM [Dauner et al., 2023] 41.68 91.25 90.00 81.25 44.91 93.75 100 100 100
> DiffusionPlanner [Zheng et al., 2025] 25.76 ––––––––PPO 42.10 90.00 65.00 81.25 69.62 11.25 93.75 61.25 94.55 PDM+PPO (Ours) 43.24 97.50 91.25 80.00 44.14 88.75 100 96.25 100

Table 2: nuPlan and interPlan results. Overall score and individual subscores on the nuPlan Val14 and interPlan reactive benchmarks. PPO is trained via self-play on nuPlan maps. cautious to PDM yet handling interactions better, with strong lane alignment likely inherited from its human-demonstration training data. Our hybrid planner outperforms the baselines in nearly all settings, combining PDM’s safety with PPO’s assertiveness. The substantial gap between the two splits across all planners further confirms that Interactive1k isolates a harder, more discriminative slice of the distribution. Disaggregating the final score into the six core metrics in Fig. 3 exposes the underlying trade-offs. PDM’s goal-completion gain on Random1k is most pronounced against Cautious traffic, where yielding agents block the ego and expose the limits of a non-negotiating planner. PPO instead exhibits a striking self-play artefact: its at-fault collision rate is lowest when paired with the PPO traffic agent and rises substantially against all others, peaking against the replay-based Expert; the policy thus overfits to behaviors seen during self-play and generalizes poorly to both reactive and non-reactive agents. PPO also scores low on all three behavioral metrics, indicating that the simple reward is insufficient for comfortable, lane-aware driving. SMART avoids this behavioral collapse but exhibits the highest off-road rate, a likely consequence of distribution shift in closed-loop rollouts, and its collision rate is markedly elevated against conservative traffic (IDM, Cautious, Mix), suggesting its learned interaction model is poorly calibrated to yielding behavior. Our hybrid planner successfully unifies PDM’s safety with PPO’s high goal completion, though behavioral metrics such as comfort and lane alignment still leave clear room for improvement. Qualitative results are shown in Appendix J. The same pattern transfers to established benchmarks. Tab. 2 reports results on nuPlan Val14 and interPlan, where our PufferDrive–nuPlan interface enables the evaluation of an at-scale RL-trained 7Method Interactive1k Random1k Realism Meta Metrics ↑                                                                                                                    

> Kinematic Metrics ↑
> Interactive Metrics ↑
> Map-based Metrics ↑minADE ↓ADE ↓Realism Meta Metrics ↑
> Kinematic Metrics ↑
> Interactive Metrics ↑
> Map-based Metrics ↑minADE ↓ADE ↓
> Ground-truth 0.80 0.50 0.87 0.88 000.80 0.52 0.84 0.90 00Random 0.41 0.05 0.53 0.46 32.53 33.95 0.41 0.04 0.52 0.47 27.96 29.39 IDM 0.67 0.25 0.76 0.79 7.36 7.36 0.67 0.28 0.74 0.80 6.48 6.48 PPO 0.64 0.18 0.72 0.79 3.69 6.47 0.64 0.20 0.72 0.80 4.21 6.62 SMART 0.74 0.37 0.82 0.84 1.72 3.74 0.74 0.40 0.80 0.85 1.56 3.63
> {πaggr
> θ, π norm
> θ, π caut
> θ}0.67 0.25 0.74 0.80 6.79 8.80 0.67 0.26 0.73 0.82 6.83 8.36
> πaggr
> θ0.67 0.27 0.75 0.81 5.04 7.30 0.68 0.28 0.75 0.83 5.47 7.31
> πnorm
> θ0.68 0.25 0.76 0.81 7.77 9.48 0.68 0.26 0.75 0.83 7.39 8.80
> πcaut
> θ0.65 0.24 0.72 0.78 7.92 9.77 0.65 0.26 0.71 0.80 7.57 8.90

Table 3: WOSAC 2024 results on Interactive1k and Random1k. Metrics include realism meta, kinematic, interactive, map-based scores and trajectory errors minADE and ADE. planner in these settings. PDM dominates on the routine-driving Val14, while PPO surpasses PDM on the interaction-heavy interPlan and outperforms the imitation-based DiffusionPlanner [Zheng et al., 2025] by a large margin, consistent with the interpretation that imitation policies struggle on the out-of-distribution states arising in closed-loop rollouts. 

Realism of traffic agents. Tab. 3 reports the WOSAC 2024 realism score [Montali et al., 2024] with its kinematic, interactive, and map-based components, alongside minADE and ADE (per-subscore breakdown in Appendix Tab. 15). SMART achieves the highest realism on both splits and approaches the ground-truth ceiling across all four metric groups, with its advantage most pronounced on the kinematic axis and trajectory errors, reflecting its behavior-cloning paradigm that inherits the empirical distribution of human driving. IDM remains competitive on the interactive and map-based axes but is limited kinematically as it only models longitudinal car-following, while PPO underperforms IDM on every axis, reflecting its simple reward. Our reward-conditioned policies instead optimize a substantially richer reward, with the corresponding weights sampled and exposed to the network as conditioning variables. Although none matches SMART, since they optimize a parameterized reward rather than imitate humans, their realism meta scores are on par with IDM and consistently above PPO, indicating that the richer reward yields more humanlike behavior. The subscore decomposition reveals the intended behavioral separation. πaggr 

> θ

attains the highest linear acceleration and lowest trajectory error, consistent with its higher target speed approaching the average WOMD speed. πnorm  

> θ

leads on interactive and map-based scores, in particular collision and offroad, reflecting a conservative balance between progress and safety, while πcaut  

> θ

attains the lowest collision and time-to-collision subscores, mirroring Fig. 4, where overly hesitant driving provokes interactions a more decisive policy would avoid. πmix  

> θ

lies between the three modes throughout, showing that our reward-conditioned agents cover a well-separated, behaviorally meaningful slice of the driving distribution that complements imitation-based agents such as SMART. Collision Comfort Goal Completion   

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Score
> 0.10
> 0.76
> 0.66
> 0.06
> 0.97
> 0.49
> 0.08
> 0.98
> 0.18
> aggr norm caut

Figure 4: Collision, comfort, and goal-completion scores on Interactive1k for the three reward-conditioned policies 

πaggr  

> θ

, πnorm  

> θ

, and πcaut  

> θ

, with the ego con-trolled by the conditioned policy and surrounding agents by IDM. 

Reward conditioning. To verify that our traffic agents behave in accordance with their reward conditioning, we compare the three behavior modes across a set of comple-mentary metrics. In each run, the ego vehicle is controlled by one of the three conditioned policies while the surround-ing agents follow IDM. Fig. 4 reports the collision, comfort, and goal-completion scores on the Interactive1k benchmark. The results closely match the intended behavioral profiles. The aggressive policy πaggr  

> θ

exhibits the highest collision rate, consistent with its preference for assertive maneuvers. Interestingly, the cautious policy πcaut  

> θ

collides slightly more often than the normal policy πnorm  

> θ

. We attribute this to the fact that overly conservative driving, such as hesitations in dense traffic, can itself provoke unsafe interactions and is therefore not strictly safer than balanced driving. The comfort score reveals a clear separation between aggres-sive and the other two modes, with πaggr  

> θ

scoring noticeably lower than normal and cautious, reflecting more abrupt ac-celerations and steering. Goal completion follows the opposite trend and scales directly with the conditioned goal speed, being highest for aggressive and lowest for cautious. These results confirm that a single trained network can be steered into qualitatively different driving styles purely by reward 8conditioning, with each style trading off different driving characteristics in the expected manner. We sometimes observe qualitative unexpected behaviors, discussed further in Appendix J. 0       

> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> At-Fault Collision  Simple vs PPO
> Simple vs IDM
> 4 × 10 91 × 10 10 4 × 10 10 1 × 10 11
> Agent steps
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> At-Fault Collision  Complex vs PPO
> Complex vs IDM

Figure 5: At-fault collision rate ( %) on the Interactive1k split for PPO planners trained via self-play under a simple (top) and complex (bottom) reward formula-tion, evaluated at intermediate check-points up to 10 11 agent steps against PPO (solid) and IDM (dashed) traffic. Both reward formulations yield low col-lision rates against their own behavior but fail to generalize to IDM behavior. 

Scaling RL alone is not enough. Fig. 5 reports the at-fault collision rate on the Interactive1k split for PPO plan-ners trained via self-play under two reward formulations of differing complexity for 10 11 agent steps. The sim-ple reward covers only goal completion, collision, and off-road terms, whereas the complex reward additionally includes behavior shaping terms such as comfort and lane alignment, full definitions are provided in Sec. E. We evaluate intermediate checkpoints against both self-play (PPO) and IDM traffic. PPO trained with the simple re-ward yields a near-zero collision rate against PPO traffic across all checkpoints, indicating that the policy handles the behavior it was trained against reliably. When the same checkpoints are evaluated against IDM traffic, however, the collision rate remains an order of magnitude higher and shows no monotonic improvement throughout train-ing. The complex reward exhibits the same pattern with a more pronounced gap. This asymmetry indicates that self-play training at scale in itself does not induce behavior generalization, and that scaling along the agent-step axis is insufficient to close the gap across traffic models. Gi-gaFlow offers a compelling solution to this generalization gap through reward conditioning, exposing the policy to a distribution over reward coefficients during training so that diverse behaviors are induced within self-play. The approach is highly effective and has been shown to yield robust, generalist policies. Two practical drawbacks re-main, however. First, the method relies on massive training budgets: GigaFlow trains for ten days and accumulates 1.6 billion km of simulated driving. Second, once the network is trained, the design effort shifts from reward shaping to the search over the reward coefficient distribution itself. 

4 Conclusion 

We introduced BehaviorBench , addressing central limitations of prior planner evaluation through three contributions. First, an evaluation interface for at-scale RL planners, including a nuPlan interface for benchmarking RL-trained policies against established planners. Second, scenario splits 

covering routine and highly interactive driving. Third, a diverse suite of traffic agents that exposes planner behavior far beyond the single-IDM setup of most benchmarks. Our results reveal a finding that most prior benchmarks obscure: the strong performance reported is in large part an artefact of homogeneous evaluation conditions. Under diverse traffic behaviors and interactive scenarios, no single baseline simultaneously achieves safety, interaction handling, and behavioral smoothness. We further find that at-scale self-play RL planners overfit to the traffic behaviors they are trained against and degrade under shifts in traffic composition. Two complementary directions emerge as promising responses: concurrent work such as GigaFlow narrows the generaliza-tion gap through reward conditioning at extreme scale, while our hybrid planner shows that combining rule-based and learned components offer a lighter-weight alternative. BehaviorBench provides the first standardized testbed on which such directions can be systematically compared. BehaviorBench thus moves the field beyond saturated single-traffic-model benchmarks toward stress-testing across diverse, interactive traffic, establishing a rigorous standard for the planning community and laying the foundation for future at-scale and RL-driven planning research. A few limitations remain open for future work. Traffic lights and stop signs are not yet integrated, currently, we mitigate this by removing agents from the scene upon goal completion, with explicit traffic light handling left for future work. Additionally, our reward-conditioned traffic agents occasionally deviate from idealized behavior, which we view less as a shortcoming than as a useful stress test for robust planners. 9Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding 

This research was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foun-dation) under grant number 539134284, through EFRE (FEIH_2698644) and the state of Baden-Württemberg. 

References 

Holger Caesar, Varun Bankiti, Alex H. Lang, Sourabh Vora, Venice Erin Liong, Qiang Xu, Anush Krishnan, Yu Pan, Giancarlo Baldan, and Oscar Beijbom. nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous driving. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2020. Holger Caesar, Juraj Kabzan, Kok Seang Tan, Whye Kit Fong, Eric Wolff, Alex Lang, Luke Fletcher, Oscar Beijbom, and Sammy Omari. Nuplan: A closed-loop ml-based planning benchmark for autonomous vehicles. In CVPR ADP3 workshop , 2022. Ming-Fang Chang, John Lambert, Patsorn Sangkloy, Jagjeet Singh, Slawomir Bak, Andrew Hartnett, De Wang, Peter Carr, Simon Lucey, Deva Ramanan, and James Hays. Argoverse: 3D tracking and forecasting with rich maps. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2019. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2019.00895. Valentin Charraut, Waël Doulazmi, Thomas Tournaire, and Thibault Buhet. V-max: A reinforcement learning framework for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08388 , 2025. Jie Cheng, Yingbing Chen, Xiaodong Mei, Bowen Yang, Bo Li, and Ming Liu. Rethinking imitation-based planners for autonomous driving. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 14123–14130, 05 2024. doi: 10.1109/ICRA57147.2024.10611364. Daphne Cornelisse, Aarav Pandya, Kevin Joseph, Joseph Suárez, and Eugene Vinitsky. Building reliable sim driving agents by scaling self-play, 2025. Marco Cusumano-Towner, David Hafner, Alex Hertzberg, Brody Huval, Aleksei Petrenko, Eugene Vinitsky, Erik Wijmans, Taylor Killian, Stuart Bowers, Ozan Sener, Philipp Krähenbühl, and Vladlen Koltun. Robust autonomy emerges from self-play. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2025. Daniel Dauner, Marcel Hallgarten, Andreas Geiger, and Kashyap Chitta. Parting with misconceptions about learning-based vehicle motion planning. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2023. Aron Distelzweig, Faris Janjoš, Oliver Scheel, Sirish Reddy Varra, Raghu Rajan, and Joschka Boedecker. Perfect prediction or plenty of proposals? what matters most in planning for au-tonomous driving, 2025. Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Antonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. CARLA: An open urban driving simulator. In Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on Robot Learning ,pages 1–16, 2017. Scott Ettinger, Shuyang Cheng, Benjamin Caine, Chenxi Liu, Hang Zhao, Sabeek Pradhan, Yuning Chai, Ben Sapp, Charles R Qi, Yin Zhou, et al. Large scale interactive motion forecasting for autonomous driving: The waymo open motion dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 9710–9719, 2021. Cole Gulino, Justin Fu, Wenjie Luo, George Tucker, Eli Bronstein, Yiren Lu, Jean Harb, Xinlei Pan, Yan Wang, Xiangyu Chen, John D. Co-Reyes, Rishabh Agarwal, Rebecca Roelofs, Yao Lu, Nico Montali, Paul Mougin, Zoey Yang, Brandyn White, Aleksandra Faust, Rowan McAllister, Dragomir Anguelov, and Benjamin Sapp. Waymax: An accelerated, data-driven simulator for large-scale autonomous driving research. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks , 2023. 10 Marcel Hallgarten, Julian Zapata, Martin Stoll, Katrin Renz, and Andreas Zell. Can vehicle motion planning generalize to realistic long-tail scenarios? In IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pages 5388–5395, 10 2024. doi: 10.1109/IROS58592.2024.10803052. Zhiyu Huang, Peter Karkus, Boris Ivanovic, Yuxiao Chen, Marco Pavone, and Chen Lv. Dtpp: Dif-ferentiable joint conditional prediction and cost evaluation for tree policy planning in autonomous driving. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 6806–6812, 2024. Bernhard Jaeger, Daniel Dauner, Jens Beißwenger, Simon Gerstenecker, Kashyap Chitta, and An-dreas Geiger. Carl: Learning scalable planning policies with simple rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.17838 , 2025a. Bernhard Jaeger, Daniel Dauner, Jens Beißwenger, Simon Gerstenecker, Kashyap Chitta, and Andreas Geiger. Carl: Learning scalable planning policies with simple rewards. In Proc. of the Conf. on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2025b. Napat Karnchanachari, Dimitris Geromichalos, Kok Seang Tan, Nanxiang Li, Christopher Eriksen, Shakiba Yaghoubi, Noushin Mehdipour, Gianmarco Bernasconi, Whye Kit Fong, Yiluan Guo, and Holger Caesar. Towards learning-based planning: The nuplan benchmark for real-world autonomous driving. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2024. doi: 10.1109/ICRA57147.2024.10611484. Saman Kazemkhani, Aarav Pandya, Daphne Cornelisse, Brennan Shacklett, and Eugene Vinitsky. Gpudrive: Data-driven, multi-agent driving simulation at 1 million fps. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. Quanyi Li, Zhenghao Peng, Lan Feng, Qihang Zhang, Zhenghai Xue, and Bolei Zhou. Metadrive: Composing diverse driving scenarios for generalizable reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2022. Quanyi Li, Zhenghao Mark Peng, Lan Feng, Zhizheng Liu, Chenda Duan, Wenjie Mo, and Bolei Zhou. Scenarionet: Open-source platform for large-scale traffic scenario simulation and modeling. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:3894–3920, 2023. Nico Montali, John Lambert, Paul Arber, Nick Bber, et al. The waymo open sim agents challenge. In 

NeurIPS 2023 Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2024. John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. ArXiv , abs/1707.06347, 2017. Joseph Suarez. Pufferlib: Making reinforcement learning libraries and environments play nice, 2024. Martin Treiber, Ansgar Hennecke, and Dirk Helbing. Congested traffic states in empirical observations and microscopic simulations. Physical Review E , 62(2):1805–1824, August 2000. ISSN 1095-3787. doi: 10.1103/physreve.62.1805. Wei Wu, Xiaoxin Feng, Ziyan Gao, and Yuheng Kan. Smart: Scalable multi-agent real-time motion generation via next-token prediction. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, pages 114048–114071. Curran Associates, Inc., 2024. doi: 10.52202/079017-3622. Yuan Yin, Pegah Khayatan, Éloi Zablocki, Alexandre Boulch, and Matthieu Cord. Regents: Real-world safety-critical driving scenario generation made stable. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 262–276. Springer, 2024. Yinan Zheng, Ruiming Liang, Kexin ZHENG, Jinliang Zheng, Liyuan Mao, Jianxiong Li, Weihao Gu, Rui Ai, Shengbo Eben Li, Xianyuan Zhan, and Jingjing Liu. Diffusion-based planning for autonomous driving with flexible guidance. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 11 A Related Work 

In this section, we review datasets and benchmarks that support closed-loop simulation, distinguishing our scope from perception-centric prediction benchmarks like nuScenes [Caesar et al., 2020] or Argoverse [Chang et al., 2019]. We include the Waymo Open Motion Dataset (WOMD) [Ettinger et al., 2021] due to its essential role in validating simulation fidelity via the WOSAC framework, which plays an important role in this work. We continue discussing simulation frameworks and their capabilities in the last part of this section. A detailed feature-based comparison of these frameworks is presented in Table 4. 

A.1 Datasets and Benchmarks 

nuPlan [Karnchanachari et al., 2024] serves as the primary large-scale dataset and benchmark for closed-loop planning, comprising 1,282 hours of driving data from four cities with high-fidelity object tracks, traffic lights, and over 70 scenario types. Several benchmarks have been proposed on top of nuPlan to evaluate closed-loop planners, each addressing different shortcomings but introducing new limitations. The widely adopted Val14 benchmark [Dauner et al., 2023] provides a standardized subset of 1,118 nuPlan scenarios evaluated using the Closed-Loop Score (CLS), but predominantly covers basic driving situations. To address this, Test14-Hard [Cheng et al., 2024] selects the 20 hardest nuPlan scenarios per type based on the performance of PDM-Closed [Dauner et al., 2023], a strong rule-based planner, however, this selection criterion introduces a planner-specific bias rather than principled long-tail sampling. Going beyond scenario selection, interPlan [Hallgarten et al., 2024] augments nuPlan with 80 hand-designed interactive scenarios across eight categories and introduces conservative and assertive IDM traffic agent policies by using different IDM parameters. While it reveals critical planner shortcomings, its agent variants remain modifications of IDM’s reaction timing rather than fundamentally different behavioral models, and hand-crafted augmentation at this scale does not cover the diversity required for comprehensive evaluation. We address the agent diversity limitation in Subsection 2.3. WOSAC [Montali et al., 2024] evaluates simulation fidelity by measuring the distributional realism of 8-second rollouts against the WOMD, which provides over 570 hours of interactive human driving data across six U.S. cities. We adopt the WOSAC 2024 metrics in our framework to assess the realism of our traffic agents (Tab. 3). 

A.2 Simulation Frameworks 

In the following section, we contextualize BehaviorBench by comparing it against prominent sim-ulation frameworks–specifically CARLA [Dosovitskiy et al., 2017], MetaDrive [Li et al., 2022], Waymax [Gulino et al., 2023], GPUDrive [Kazemkhani et al., 2025], PufferDrive [Cornelisse et al., 2025], nuPlan [Caesar et al., 2022], and V-Max [Charraut et al., 2025]. Our analysis evaluates these platforms based on their supported datasets and benchmarks, traffic agent modeling and multi-agent capabilities, simulation throughput, and the integration of advanced simulator features. A detailed comparison of simulators is provided in Appendix Tab. 4. This comparison provides the necessary context to understand how BehaviorBench relates to existing tools in terms of functionality and performance across these core categories. 

Supported Datasets and Benchmarks The field of autonomous driving simulation ranges from localized, synthetic environments to massive-scale, real-world data integration to enhance model generalizability. While legacy simulators like CARLA are often restricted to low-diversity synthetic datasets, modern frameworks such as Waymax, GPUDrive, and PufferDrive prioritize the Waymo Open Motion Dataset (WOMD), frequently extending it with the Waymo Open Sim Agents Chal-lenge (WOSAC) for more robust behavioral modeling. Similarly, nuPlan employs a multi-tiered evaluation structure, utilizing specialized subsets like Val14, Test14-Hard, and interPlan to stress-test agents under diverse conditions. To overcome inherent data limitations, MetaDrive builds on the ScenarioNet [Li et al., 2023] framework, which provides access to a diverse set of driving datasets, including Waymo, nuPlan, and Argoverse. In addition to these real-world sources, MetaDrive supports synthetically generated data, ranging from safety-critical traffic scenarios to procedurally 12 Simulator Dataset / Map Diff. Scale Log replay Rule-based Learning-based Self-play CARLA LB Val14 Test14-Hard interPlan WOSAC                                                                                                 

> CARLA [Dosovitskiy et al., 2017] Synthetic ×-×✓××✓××××
> MetaDrive [Li et al., 2022] Synthetic + WOMD + nuPlan † ×-✓✓✓✓×××××
> nuPlan [Karnchanachari et al., 2024] nuPlan ×-✓✓×××✓✓✓×
> Waymax [Gulino et al., 2023] WOMD ✓◦✓✓✓×××××✓
> V-Max [Charraut et al., 2025] WOMD + nuPlan ✓◦✓✓✓××✓✓×✓
> GPUDrive [Kazemkhani et al., 2025] WOMD ×◦✓×✓✓×××××
> PufferDrive [Cornelisse et al., 2025] WOMD ×+××✓✓××××✓
> BehaviorBench (Ours) WOMD + nuPlan ×+✓✓✓✓×✓✓✓✓

Table 4: Comparison of open-source autonomous driving simulators. Diff. : gradients propagate through simulation dynamics. Scale : Relative simulation throughput. Categorized as slower ( - ), comparable ( ◦ ) or faster ( + ) relative to the GPUDrive baseline [Kazemkhani et al., 2025]). Agent-model columns indicate which traffic-agent models are supported during evaluation (Log replay, Rule-based, Learning-based) and whether Self-play can be used during training. Benchmark columns indicate which standardised evaluation suites are supported. † indicates support for datasets included in ScenarioNet [Li et al., 2023]. generated road networks. Both V-Max and BehaviorBench utilize the ScenarioMax framework, an extension of ScenarioNet [Li et al., 2023]. This enables seamless scaling across heterogeneous datasets and facilitates a dataset-agnostic training environment that surpasses the native constraints of earlier implementations. The primary distinction between these high-scale simulators lies in their evaluative focus: while V-Max assesses agent robustness against adversarial actors via ReGentS [Yin et al., 2024], BehaviorBench expands the benchmarking of complex behaviors by introducing two additional evaluation datasets. 

Traffic agent modeling and Multi-Agent Support Effective agent steering is essential for au-tonomous driving research, requiring a mix of non-reactive and reactive behaviors to ensure robust training and evaluation. MetaDrive supports multiple execution modes for real-world data, includ-ing log-replay, rule-based simulation and learning-based control. In contrast, simulators such as nuPlan and CARLA typically focus on single-agent training where the ego-vehicle interacts with rule-based traffic. While V-Max utilizes log-replay for training, it offers a diverse preimplemented evaluation suite including imitation learning, RL, and rule-based policies like IDM and PDM. Way-max, GPUDrive, and PufferDrive all enable multi-agent training, however, they often rely on a self-play paradigm where a single model controls multiple objects. This reliance on self-play often results in overfitting to the model’s specific behavioral patterns. GigaFlow [Cusumano-Towner et al., 2025]—the closed-source predecessor to GPUDrive and PufferDrive—addresses this limitation by employing reward conditioning to foster greater behavioral diversity. Waymax supports user-defined agent behaviors with pre-implemented log-replay and IDM agents. BehaviorBench supports PPO-only self-play and leverages reward conditioning to generate a theoretically infinite spectrum of behavioral styles (e.g., cautious to aggressive). Furthermore, it allows for the inclusion of log-replay and IDM-based agents via adjustable fractions. 

Simulation Scale In the landscape of high-throughput multi-agent simulation, a distinct hierarchy of computational performance has emerged among leading frameworks. GPUDrive demonstrates a substantial efficiency advantage, outperforming Waymax [Kazemkhani et al., 2025] in throughput. Empirical evidence from the V-Max literature demonstrates that runtimes are largely commensurate with the Waymax baseline, potentially even slightly lower, while simultaneously claiming superior computational performance over nuPlan and MetaDrive [Charraut et al., 2025]. This performance gap is further contextualized by CaRL [Jaeger et al., 2025a], which, despite providing significant acceleration for CARLA, notes that its performance still does not fully reach the level of nuPlan. PufferDrive exceeds GPUDrive’s benchmarks in execution speed, offering a highly optimized solution for large-scale tasks. By building on this architecture, Behavior Bench inherits these gains to provide high-throughput simulation. 13 Advanced Simulator Features Realistic partial observability and the inclusion of pedestrians and cyclists are critical for simulating real-world driving complexity. While CARLA provides partial observability via camera inputs, Waymax, and V-Max employ LiDAR-based masking where objects physically obstruct line-of-sight. In contrast, GPUDrive, PufferDrive, and nuPlan assume full observability. Regarding agent diversity, most frameworks support pedestrians and cyclists, though they are notably absent in PufferDrive and MetaDrive. Additionally, Waymax stands as the only platform offering native differentiability; while V-Max theoretically shares this capability through its Waymax integration, it is not utilized to the best of our knowledge. While BehaviorBench supports the integration of pedestrians and cyclists, it currently operates under the assumption of full observability. 

B Evaluation Metrics 

Each scenario is summarized by six scalars: three continuous behavior scores ∈ [0 , 1] (comfort, lane alignment, lane center) and three binary outcome indicators ∈ { 0, 1} (goal, off-road, at-fault collision). Let T be the number of steps the ego was alive. 

B.1 Behavior scores Comfort ( Scmf ). At each active step the ego can incur up to three comfort violations 

v(t) = I|a(t) 

> long |>3

+ I|a(t)  

> lat |>3

+ Imax( | ˙a(t)   

> long |,|˙a(t)
> lat |)>5

∈ { 0, 1, 2, 3}, (4) with accelerations in m /s2 and jerks in m /s3. Summing V = PTt=1 v(t) ∈ [0 , 3T ] gives 

Scmf = 1 − min 

 V

3 T , 1



. (5) A fully comfortable scenario scores 1, saturating all three violation types every step scores 0.

Lane alignment ( Salign ). Fraction of active steps at which the ego’s heading is within a fixed angular tolerance τ of its nearest lane segment. With θ(t) 

> ego

the ego heading and θ(t) 

> lane

the heading of the nearest lane segment: 

Salign = 1

T

> T

X

> t=1

I

h

θ(t) 

> ego

− θ(t) 

> lane

< τ 

i

, τ = π 

> 12

. (6) 

Lane center ( Sctr ). Mean absolute lateral distance d(t) from the ego to the closest lane centerline, averaged over active steps and normalized by Lref = 2 .0 m: 

¯d = 1

T

> T

X

> t=1

d(t), Sctr = 1 − min 

 ¯dLref 

, 1



. (7) 

B.2 Outcome indicators Goal completion ( Sgoal ). Sgoal = 1 iff the ego reaches its scenario goal (within rgoal = 2 m and below a certain speed threshold), 0 otherwise. 

Off-road ( Soff ). Soff = 1 iff the ego crosses the road edge at any step, 0 otherwise. 

At-fault collision ( Scol ). Scol = 1 iff the ego caused a collision (Sec. B.3), 0 otherwise. 

B.3 At-fault classification 

Following nuPlan, we distinguish several categories of at fault collisions. The classification comprises three criteria: whether the agent is stationary (speed below vstop = 0 .1 m/s ), where the other agent sits relative to the ego heading, and whether the ego is approaching it. We refer to an agent as ahead 14 when it lies within a 60 ◦ frontal cone of the ego, and as behind when it lies in the rear 30 ◦ sector, the remaining angles are treated as lateral. Approaching means the gap between the two agents is closing at more than 0.5 m/s. If the ego is stationary at the moment of contact ( STOPPED -EGO ), the collision is not at fault. If instead the other agent is stationary ( STOPPED -TRACK ), the ego must have driven into it and is classified as at fault. Driving into an agent ahead ( ACTIVE -FRONT ) is classified as at fault, while an agent driving into the ego from behind ( ACTIVE -REAR ) is not. The remaining lateral ( ACTIVE -LATERAL ) and rear (ACTIVE -REAR ) cases are only at fault when the ego’s trajectory is consistent with a lane change, identified if it’s overlapping with two or more lane polylines and a lateral drift of more than 0.3 mrelative to its heading. Both conditions must hold, which avoids false attributions on curved or narrow roads. Contacts with vulnerable road users are always classified as at fault. Table 5 summaries the resulting categories.                   

> Type Condition Interpretation At fault
> STOPPED -EGO ego stationary ego is standing still no
> STOPPED -TRACK other agent stationary ego drives into stopped agent yes
> ACTIVE -REAR other agent behind ego contact comes from behind only if lane change
> ACTIVE -FRONT other agent ahead, ego approaching ego closes in on agent ahead yes
> ACTIVE -LATERAL otherwise side-on contact only if lane change

Table 5: Collision categories and resulting fault assignment. 

C Interactive1k 

In this section, we describe the components of Sint in more detail: • Trajectory crossings (ccross ): number of unique agents whose ground-truth trajectories geometrically intersect with the ego’s trajectory, indicating potential interaction. • Proximity-weighted acceleration (caccel ): sum of ego acceleration changes, each weighted by the inverse distance to the nearest agent, capturing reactive braking or acceleration maneuvers caused by other traffic participants. • Proximity-weighted steering (csteer ): analogous to the above for steering changes, capturing lateral evasive maneuvers near other agents. • TTC-critical steps (cttc ): number of simulation steps where the ego’s time-to-collision with any approaching agent falls below 3 s, measuring sustained exposure to near-collision situations. • Nearby agents (cagents ): number of agents within a 40 m radius of the ego at t = 0 , reflecting initial scene density. • Goal distance (cgoal ): distance to the ego’s goal, favoring longer scenarios that require sustained planning. We provide the weights wi and the normalization thresholds τi in Tab. 6. The normalization thresholds 

τi were set to the 75th–90th percentile of each component’s distribution, so that typical scenarios score well below 1.0 while genuinely interactive ones saturate the individual terms. Scenarios are excluded if the ego goal distance is below 10 m or fewer than 3 agents are present. 

D Network Architecture 

Both the unconditional and reward-conditioned policies share the same encoder architecture. A per-agent observation is partitioned into three input groups: the ego state, up to MP partner objects, and up to MR road objects. The conditioned network additionally receives a fourth group containing the ten reward-conditioning coefficients c, which we describe in Sec. F. We train both networks for 

10 11 agent steps on 8 NVIDIA L40S GPUs (48 GB each), taking approximately 20 h at a throughput of 1.7 M steps per second. 15 Comp. Description wi τi

ccross Traj. crossings 0.30 4

caccel Ego accel. changes 0.15 60 

csteer Ego steering changes 0.15 0.1 

cttc TTC < 3 s 0.20 60 

cagents Agents < 40 m 0.10 10 

cgoal Goal distance 0.10 100 Table 6: Components of the interactivity score Sint .

Unconditional policy ( πθ ). The three branch embeddings are concatenated and projected by a shared MLP into a single latent z ∈ RHsh :

z = femb 

  [ hego ; hroad ; hpart ] . (8) The latent is then passed through a single-layer LSTM that integrates information across time, and the recurrent state feeds a categorical actor and a scalar critic: 

ht = LSTM( zt, h t−1), πθ (a | o) = Cat  Actor( ht), Vθ (o) = Critic( ht). (9) The discrete action head produces |A| = 91 logits corresponding to the Cartesian product of 7 longitudinal accelerations and 13 steering angles. 

Reward-conditioned policy ( πcθ ). The conditioned variant adds a fourth encoder branch that embeds the nine-dimensional conditioning vector c, and extends the concatenation into the shared projection accordingly: 

zc = femb 

  [ hego ; hroad ; hpart ; hc ] . (10) All components (LSTM, actor, critic) are identical to the unconditional policy. By re-sampling 

c ∼ p(c) at the start of every training episode, the same network learns a continuous family of driving styles, at evaluation, pinning c to a specific point of the sampling distribution (Tab. 9) instantiates the corresponding behavior. 

Unconditional Conditioned 

Encoder branches ego, road, partner + c_reward Shared embedding input [hego ; hroad ; hpart ] [hego ; hroad ; hpart ; hc]

Recurrent core LSTM LSTM Actor / Critic discrete 91 / scalar discrete 91 / scalar #Parameters 614k 635k 

Table 7: Side-by-side summary. The conditioned variant differs only in the added creward branch and the correspondingly wider concatenation, the recurrent core and output heads are identical. 

E Reward Function 

Following GigaFlow [Cusumano-Towner et al., 2025], we use a similar per-step reward 

Rt = Rgoal + Rcollision + Roff-road + Rcomfort + Rl-align 

+ Rl-center + Rvelocity + Rreverse + Rtimestep . (11) with each term definition provided in Tab. 9. We train two unconditioned networks via PPO that share an identical architecture and differ only in the per-step reward. The simple variant assigns (negative) rewards only for collisions, off-road, and goal completion, whereas the complex variant follows Cusumano-Towner et al. [2025] and includes nearly all terms. The fixed coefficients for the simple and complex version are provided in Tab. 8. 16 Coefficient Simple Complex 

vgoal 100 100 

δgoal 2.0 2.0

αcollision 0.5 3.0

αboundary 0.5 3.0

αcomfort 0 0.05 

αl-align 0 0.025 

αvel-align 0 1.0

αl-center 0 0.0038 

αcenter-bias 0 0

αvelocity 0 0.0025 

αreverse 0 0.005 

αtimestep 0 2.5×10 −5

Table 8: Fixed reward coefficients for the two non-conditioned baselines. 

F Reward Conditioning 

In the per-step reward Rt each term is weighted by a coefficient α. We train a conditioned network via PPO, that observes the coefficients as part of the input. The coefficients are resampled uniformly at the start of every training episode, conditioning the agent on a driving style. In evaluation, the coefficients can be held fixed to instantiate a specific driving behavior. At every episode reset, each agent samples a ten-dimensional conditioning vector 

c = ( vgoal , δ goal , α collision , α boundary , α comfort , α l-align , α vel-align , α l-center , α center-bias , α reverse ) (12) from the training distribution in Tab. 9. Each component is normalized to [−1, 1] using the sampling range and appended to the observation. The per-step reward is the sum of all rows in Tab. 9. The reward coefficients that form the behavior of our three traffic agents are presented in Tab. 10. 

Reward Training distribution 

Rgoal = I(∥x−g∥<δ goal ∧ | v|<v goal ) δgoal ∼ U (2 , 12) , vgoal ∼ U (3 , 30) 

Rcollision = −(αcollision + 0 .1 |v|) Icollision αcollision ∼ U (0 , 3) 

Roff-road = −αboundary Iboundary αboundary ∼ U (0 , 3) 

Rcomfort = −αcomfort 



I|along |>3 + I|alat |>3 + I| ˙along |>5 ∨ | ˙alat |>5



αcomfort ∼ U (0 , 0.1) 

Rl-align = αl-align ∆t



min(cos θf , 0) + αvel-align min(cos θf · v, 0) + 0 .0025 (1 − |θf | 

> π/ 2

)

 αl-align ∼ U (2 .5 × 10 −4, 2.5 × 10 −2)

αvel-align ∼ U (0 , 1) 

Rl-center = −αl-center ∆t



Icos θf >0.5 · | xf − αcenter-bias | − 0.05 exp( |xf − αcenter-bias | − 0.5) 

 αl-center ∼ U (2 .5 × 10 −4, 7.5 × 10 −3)

αcenter-bias ∼ U (−0.5, 0.5) 

Rvelocity = αvelocity ∆t · max(cos θf , 0) I|v|>2.5 αvelocity = 2 .5 × 10 −3

Rreverse = −αreverse ∆t Iv< 0 αreverse ∼ U (2 .5 × 10 −4, 7.5 × 10 −3)

Rtimestep = −αtimestep ∆t · I|v|>0 ∨ | a|>0 αtimestep = 2 .5 × 10 −5

Table 9: Reward components and their training-time sampling distributions. Terms with ∼ are per-agent, per-episode sampled conditioning coefficients, fixed values are identical for all agents and not part of the conditioning vector. 

G Traffic Agents 

The coefficients of the three conditioned traffic agents can be found in Tab. 10. We use similar IDM parameters as in nuPlan and provide them in Tab. 11. 17 Coefficient Aggressive Normal Cautious                                                   

> πaggr
> θπnorm
> θπcaut
> θ
> vgoal 30 20 5
> δgoal 222
> αcollision 0.23.03.0
> αboundary 0.23.03.0
> αcomfort 0.00.05 0.1
> αl-align 1.0×10 −31.5×10 −22.5×10 −2
> αvel-align 0.10.51.0
> αl-center 2.5×10 −43.8×10 −37.5×10 −3
> αcenter-bias 0.00.00.5
> αreverse 2.5×10 −43.8×10 −37.5×10 −3

Table 10: Reward coefficients defining the three condi-tioned traffic behaviors.                      

> Parameter Symbol Value Unit
> Target velocity v015.0 m/s Minimum gap s01.0 mDesired time headway T1.5 sMaximum acceleration a1.0 m/s 2
> Maximum deceleration b2.0 m/s 2
> Acceleration exponent δ4.0 –

Table 11: Intelligent Driver Model (IDM) parameters. 

H Hybrid Planner: PDM+PPO 

The motivation behind our approach is to combine the safety of rule-based planners such as PDM with the assertiveness of a policy trained via PPO and a simple reward. Our experiments indicate that PDM performs better in routine driving scenarios, whereas a policy trained via PPO and a simple reward is more effective in interactive ones, suggesting that the two paradigms are complementary rather than competing. A second motivation stems from the well-known difficulty of designing reward functions for driving, which typically demands extensive tuning and the careful integration of many driving principles into a single complex objective. Instead, we train a policy with only a small set of high-level driving principles, namely off-road avoidance, collision avoidance, and goal completion. By rolling out multiple high-probability actions from this policy and scoring the resulting trajectories with a comprehensive scoring function, we additionally enforce lower-level principles such as comfort, lane alignment, and centered driving at planning time rather than during reward engineering. In our nuPlan evaluation, the comparatively slow simulation prevented us from performing rollouts at inference time, so we instead selected the most likely action from the policy. This highlights a key advantage of PufferDrive: its high simulation throughput makes it feasible to use the simulator itself as the forward model and to evaluate multiple rollouts within a reasonable planning budget, which is not feasible in nuPlan. For PDM we used a horizon of 4 s, while for the PPO fallback we selected the top-8 actions from the policy πθ and rolled each out for 1 s. Pseudocode for the hybrid planner is provided in Alg. 1. We ablate the choice of K in Fig. 6 and observe that performance improves monotonically with K,with diminishing returns beyond K = 8 . Fig. 7 reports the corresponding runtime analysis of our hybrid planner. Per-step runtime grows with K but remains well within real-time budgets across all configurations. Compared to the original PDM implementation, we reimplement the IDM simulation in C rather than Python, yielding a substantial speed-up. We further ablate the planning horizon H2 in Fig. 8 and observe a sharp jump in score from H2 = 0 to 

H2 = 1 on both splits. On Interactive1k, performance peaks at short horizons and gradually declines beyond H2 = 10 , which we attribute to the fixed agent predictions used during rollout, extending the horizon propagates the assumption that surrounding agents follow predetermined trajectories unaffected by the ego vehicle, biasing trajectory selection towards overly conservative behavior in densely interactive scenes. On Random1k, by contrast, the score saturates after H2 = 5 as these scenarios contain less interaction. Fig. 9 shows that per-step runtime grows monotonically with H2,but even at the largest evaluated horizon of H2 = 40 (4 s) the runtime stays well below the 100 ms budget required for real-time operation at 10 Hz. 18 Algorithm 1 Our Hybrid PDM+PPO Planner 

Require: state st, policy πθ , rollout horizons H1, H2, number of rollouts K 

> 1:

Y ← CVP REDICTION (st, H 1) ▷ constant-velocity forecast of surrounding agents  

> 2:

{τi, c i}15  

> i=1

← PDM (st, Y ) ▷ IDM proposals scored by PDM  

> 3:

if max i ci > 0 then  

> 4:

i⋆ = arg max i ci 

> 5:

return τi⋆ 

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

{ak}Kk=1 ← TOP K πθ (st) ▷ fallback: top-K policy πθ actions  

> 8:

for k = 1 , . . . , K do  

> 9:

τk ← ROLLOUT (st, a k, Y ) ▷ H 2-step rollout under forecast Y 

> 10:

ck ← SCORE (τk) ▷ collision, off-road, progress, comfort, alignment, centerline  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

k⋆ = arg max k ck 

> 13:

return τk⋆2 4 8 10    

> top-K
> 40
> 45
> 50
> 55
> 60
> 65
> 70
> Score
> Interactive1k
> 24810
> top-K
> Random1k

Figure 6: Score of the PDM+PPO hybrid planner as a function of top-K on Interactive1k (left) and Random1k (right). Each red marker reports the mean score (scaled by 100) over all scenarios for one traffic agent type, and the box summarizes the resulting distribution across traffic agent types at a fixed planning horizon of 10 steps (1 s). Performance improves with increasing top-K on both splits, with diminishing returns beyond K = 8 . The spread across traffic conditions is markedly larger on Interactive1k than on Random1k, reflecting the heavier reactive demands of the interactive scenarios. 2 4 8 10    

> top-K
> 28
> 30
> 32
> 34
> 36
> 38
> 40
> 42
> Runtime [ms]
> Interactive1k
> 24810
> top-K
> Random1k

Figure 7: Per-step runtime of the PDM+PPO hybrid planner as a function of top-K on Interactive1k (left) and Random1k (right). Each red marker reports the mean per-step runtime in ms over all scenarios for one traffic agent type, and the box summarizes the distribution across traffic agent types at a fixed planning horizon of 10 steps (1 s). Runtime grows with top-K on both splits and remains consistently higher on Interactive1k than on Random1k, reflecting the additional cost induced by denser scenarios. 19 0 1 5 10 20 40      

> Horizon
> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50
> 55
> 60
> 65
> 70
> 75
> Score
> Interactive1k
> 01510 20 40
> Horizon
> Random1k

Figure 8: Score of the PDM+PPO hybrid planner as a function of the planning horizon H2 on Interactive1k (left) and Random1k (right). Each red marker reports the mean score over all scenarios for one traffic agent type, and the box summarizes the distribution across traffic agent types at a fixed top-K with K = 8 .0 1 5 10 20 40      

> Horizon
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45
> 50
> 55
> Runtime [ms]
> Interactive1k
> 01510 20 40
> Horizon
> Random1k

Figure 9: Per-step runtime of the PDM+PPO hybrid planner as a function of the planning horizon on Interactive1k (left) and Random1k (right). Each red marker reports the mean per-step runtime in ms over all scenarios for one traffic agent type, and the box summarizes the distribution across traffic agent types at a fixed top-K with K = 8 . Runtime grows with the horizon on both splits and remains consistently higher on Interactive1k than on Random1k, reflecting the additional cost induced by denser scenarios. 20 I WOSAC Realism Evaluation 

We evaluate driving realism using the Waymo Open Sim Agents Challenge (WOSAC) 2024 met-rics [Montali et al., 2024]. All agents in a scenario are controlled by the same planner policy. For each scenario, we perform K = 32 stochastic rollouts starting from a shared initial state observed from the log for Tinit = 10 steps. The simulation then runs for Tsim = 81 steps at ∆t = 0 .1 s (total episode length 91 steps = 9 .1 s). An overview of the parameters can be found in Tab. 12. Table 12: WOSAC evaluation parameters. 

Parameter Value Description 

Episode length 91 steps Total scenario duration ( 9.1 s) 

∆t 0.1 s Simulation timestep Init steps Tinit 10 GT-driven warm-up steps Sim steps Tsim 81 Policy-controlled steps Num. rollouts K 32 Stochastic rollouts per scenario 

J Additional Results 

We provide the per-subscore results of our evaluation on Interactive1k and Random1k in Tab. 13 and Tab. 14, as well as the per-subscore WOSAC results for our conditioned traffic agents in Tab. 15. Additional qualitative results for Interactive1k and Random1k are shown in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11. These examples confirm that Interactive1k contains denser and more interactive scenarios, often requiring lane changes and complex interactions, whereas Random1k consists of simpler scenarios with less interaction. We also provide qualitative results of our traffic agents in Figures 12 to 21. We observe that the conditioned traffic agents exhibit behavior consistent with the intended conditioning. Positive examples are shown in Fig.12, Fig.13, and Fig.19. In particular, the aggressive agents in red tend to drive faster and overtake other vehicles more frequently than the other agent types. Such an overtaking maneuver is shown in Fig.13, where the aggressive agent overtakes another vehicle while the expert trajectory does not. However, we also observe scenarios in which the conditioned agents do not fully exhibit the expected behavior. For example, Fig.12 shows a normal agent in blue failing to successfully complete a left turn. Similar behavior can be observed for the cautious traffic agents, for instance in Fig.18. Fig. 12 shows another cases in which an aggressive agent drives on the wrong lane. In contrast to the planner, the traffic agents do not need to behave perfectly in all scenarios, as a robust planner should also perform well under unexpected or imperfect traffic behavior. Method IDM SMART PPO Expert AF Off Goal Cmf Aln Ctr Score AF Off Goal Cmf Aln Ctr Score AF Off Goal Cmf Aln Ctr Score AF Off Goal Cmf Aln Ctr Score                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

> Interactive1k
> IDM 1.70 1.10 15.40 94.25 95.65 96.91 15.05 1.50 1.30 16.00 93.39 95.35 96.60 15.70 1.50 1.50 21.00 93.83 95.60 96.84 20.52 3.60 1.20 12.40 93.18 95.47 96.40 12.13 PDM 1.70 0.70 24.80 90.60 94.55 96.10 23.99 1.00 0.70 31.30 88.67 93.94 94.83 30.43 0.90 1.10 30.60 84.07 94.08 94.49 29.06 3.10 0.90 21.20 89.27 94.31 95.08 20.60 PPO 4.00 0.40 80.20 27.87 65.78 65.29 46.69 4.60 0.40 81.50 28.60 67.56 64.70 48.50 0.50 0.20 96.90 25.17 73.29 64.40 59.53 21.20 0.80 63.70 29.20 68.13 65.50 38.81 SMART 14.30 5.00 34.00 48.20 87.57 83.69 27.72 4.30 6.80 44.70 47.89 87.15 82.92 36.20 3.50 6.10 41.20 48.00 87.33 83.02 33.29 8.70 5.30 46.40 47.90 87.00 83.04 37.65 PDM+PPO 0.50 0.20 66.70 45.92 77.34 78.01 48.49 2.90 0.20 75.40 42.77 76.92 76.52 54.09 0.90 0.40 84.90 39.25 76.53 76.33 59.37 14.60 0.30 57.30 45.07 76.32 76.86 41.66
> Random1k
> IDM 1.60 2.90 57.40 93.84 93.96 93.46 55.22 1.80 2.80 54.80 93.28 94.01 93.48 52.77 1.40 2.80 61.30 93.53 93.96 93.48 58.91 4.60 3.00 52.60 93.36 93.94 93.20 50.65 PDM 1.20 1.30 67.70 89.30 93.00 92.65 63.67 0.50 1.40 64.60 88.75 93.11 92.26 60.86 0.20 1.60 71.60 86.54 92.96 92.00 66.79 4.10 1.40 60.10 89.25 92.94 92.24 56.67 PPO 1.40 0.20 92.20 26.48 76.36 64.18 58.77 1.70 0.40 89.00 26.84 76.29 64.05 56.46 0.30 0.00 98.00 24.40 81.25 64.46 64.03 9.50 0.40 82.00 27.22 76.55 64.76 53.09 SMART 3.90 6.80 58.10 48.74 86.49 79.32 47.71 2.00 6.60 56.20 48.62 86.78 78.97 46.13 1.90 6.90 58.50 48.70 86.68 78.92 48.01 5.00 6.00 60.40 48.60 86.36 79.03 49.59 PDM+PPO 0.80 0.20 90.10 39.30 82.73 77.33 65.82 1.00 0.50 88.40 39.04 81.53 77.02 64.42 0.10 0.20 96.20 39.42 83.86 78.90 71.21 7.70 0.30 83.60 39.15 82.15 77.21 61.32

Table 13: Planner performance against traffic agents on Interactive1k and Random1k. Each row is an ego planner (IDM, PDM, PPO, SMART, and our hybrid PDM+PPO), each column block a traffic agent controlling the surrounding agents: IDM, SMART, PPO, and Expert. We report at-fault collisions (AF), off-road rate (Off), goal-reaching (Goal), comfort (Cmf), alignment (Aln), centerline adherence (Ctr), and the aggregated driving score. 21 Method Aggr. Norm. Caut. Mix AF Off Goal Cmf Aln Ctr Score AF Off Goal Cmf Aln Ctr Score AF Off Goal Cmf Aln Ctr Score AF Off Goal Cmf Aln Ctr Score 

Interactive1k 

IDM 1.00 1.60 20.10 93.34 95.55 96.81 19.62 1.10 1.50 19.60 94.07 95.70 96.84 19.24 1.90 1.20 12.70 93.50 95.70 96.89 12.44 1.60 1.40 16.70 93.66 95.55 96.87 16.37 PDM 0.60 4.70 35.20 87.43 94.10 94.60 33.98 0.70 6.30 30.40 88.23 93.73 93.54 29.55 1.00 7.00 17.20 86.52 92.89 92.52 16.54 1.10 6.40 25.40 87.20 93.66 93.44 24.55 PPO 0.90 0.30 96.20 26.69 71.30 64.68 58.44 3.40 0.50 88.80 28.48 69.76 65.16 54.05 5.90 1.30 76.00 27.95 65.16 64.81 44.34 3.10 0.60 86.80 27.75 67.90 64.71 51.46 SMART 1.70 5.10 43.10 48.03 87.46 82.93 34.86 6.50 4.90 40.90 48.28 88.08 83.12 33.20 15.30 4.20 26.40 48.44 88.07 83.68 21.49 11.10 4.80 36.30 48.28 88.06 83.24 29.51 PDM+PPO 0.20 2.80 82.40 54.57 82.88 82.07 63.97 1.10 2.00 81.00 47.62 79.83 79.75 61.07 1.70 2.60 67.20 43.92 74.66 76.17 47.60 1.20 2.00 77.10 46.47 78.05 78.61 56.71 

Random1k 

IDM 1.10 2.80 59.60 93.41 93.92 93.41 57.30 1.50 2.90 57.30 93.57 93.84 93.48 55.16 1.40 2.90 55.70 93.41 93.85 93.48 53.61 1.10 2.80 57.80 93.41 93.95 93.38 55.58 PDM 0.40 4.20 70.20 88.17 92.61 91.87 66.01 1.20 4.70 66.30 88.38 92.38 91.57 62.35 1.30 4.70 61.50 87.80 92.31 91.40 57.68 1.10 4.30 65.10 88.04 92.55 91.62 61.13 PPO 0.80 0.20 97.20 25.25 79.97 64.09 63.02 1.00 0.50 93.50 25.96 78.99 64.32 60.50 2.10 0.60 89.30 26.26 76.34 64.19 56.84 1.50 0.60 93.00 25.73 78.23 64.30 59.88 SMART 1.60 6.10 57.80 48.80 86.77 78.85 47.52 3.80 6.00 57.20 48.71 86.72 79.23 47.10 6.90 5.90 52.00 48.64 86.66 79.29 42.79 3.70 6.00 55.50 48.74 86.52 79.12 45.63 PDM+PPO 0.20 2.10 93.30 46.71 85.61 81.17 72.04 0.70 1.60 91.20 41.42 83.13 79.39 68.25 1.50 0.90 88.50 40.32 82.34 77.76 65.39 0.60 0.90 91.60 41.16 83.71 79.12 68.46 

Table 14: Planner performance against behavior-conditioned traffic agents on Interactive1k and Random1k. The four traffic policies share the same backbone but are conditioned on distinct driving styles: aggressive (Aggr.), normal (Norm.), and cautious (Caut.) behaviors, and a mixture (Mix) where each surrounding agent is independently assigned one of the three styles. We report at-fault collisions (AF), off-road rate (Off), goal-reaching (Goal), comfort (Cmf), alignment (Aln), centerline adherence (Ctr), and the aggregated driving score. 

Split Policy Kinematic Interactive Map-based Composite Metric ↑ ADE ↓ minADE ↓

Linear Speed ↑

Linear Accel. ↑

Ang. Speed ↑

Ang. Accel. ↑

Dist. to Obj. ↑ Collision ↑ TTC ↑ Dist. to Road Edge ↑ Offroad ↑

Interactive1k 

πmix 

θ 0.101 0.149 0.331 0.418 0.344 0.890 0.781 0.489 0.929 0.666 8.80 6.79 

πaggr 

θ 0.116 0.240 0.343 0.382 0.364 0.878 0.820 0.565 0.910 0.675 7.30 5.04 

πnorm 

θ 0.079 0.147 0.325 0.435 0.351 0.919 0.777 0.478 0.944 0.675 9.48 7.77 

πcaut 

θ 0.110 0.092 0.328 0.444 0.329 0.854 0.765 0.425 0.928 0.646 9.77 7.92 Random1k 

πmix 

θ 0.101 0.163 0.327 0.469 0.249 0.910 0.763 0.525 0.931 0.666 8.36 6.83 

πaggr 

θ 0.119 0.235 0.348 0.432 0.289 0.908 0.794 0.603 0.915 0.680 7.31 5.47 

πnorm 

θ 0.084 0.146 0.321 0.488 0.249 0.939 0.758 0.519 0.947 0.675 8.80 7.39 

πcaut 

θ 0.117 0.126 0.322 0.491 0.230 0.891 0.754 0.468 0.934 0.653 8.90 7.57 

Table 15: Per-subscore WOSAC 2024 for the four conditioned policies on Interactive1k and Random1k. 

22 Ego Vehicle Surrounding Agents Goal Expert Trajectory Figure 10: Example scenarios from our Interactive1k split. 23 Ego Vehicle Surrounding Agents Goal Expert Trajectory Figure 11: Example scenarios from our Random1k split. 24 IDM PPO SMART Expert     

> t= 0 t=T

Figure 12: Qualitative comparison of traffic agent models. We visualize rollouts of IDM, PPO, SMART, expert and the conditioned PPO traffic agents (top to bottom) on the same scenario at four time steps over T = 3 s (left to right). Agents are shown with their past trajectories. 25 IDM PPO SMART Expert     

> t= 0 t=T

Figure 13: Qualitative comparison of traffic agent models. We visualize rollouts of IDM, PPO, SMART, expert and the conditioned PPO traffic agents (top to bottom) on the same scenario at four time steps over T = 3 s (left to right). Agents are shown with their past trajectories. 26 IDM PPO SMART Expert     

> t= 0 t=T

Figure 14: Qualitative comparison of traffic agent models. We visualize rollouts of IDM, PPO, SMART, expert and the conditioned PPO traffic agents (top to bottom) on the same scenario at four time steps over T = 3 s (left to right). Agents are shown with their past trajectories. 27 IDM PPO SMART Expert     

> t= 0 t=T

Figure 15: Qualitative comparison of traffic agent models. We visualize rollouts of IDM, PPO, SMART, expert and the conditioned PPO traffic agents (top to bottom) on the same scenario at four time steps over T = 3 s (left to right). Agents are shown with their past trajectories. 28 IDM PPO SMART Expert     

> t= 0 t=T

Figure 16: Qualitative comparison of traffic agent models. We visualize rollouts of IDM, PPO, SMART, expert and the conditioned PPO traffic agents (top to bottom) on the same scenario at four time steps over T = 3 s (left to right). Agents are shown with their past trajectories. 29 IDM PPO SMART Expert     

> t= 0 t=T

Figure 17: Qualitative comparison of traffic agent models. We visualize rollouts of IDM, PPO, SMART, expert and the conditioned PPO traffic agents (top to bottom) on the same scenario at four time steps over T = 3 s (left to right). Agents are shown with their past trajectories. 30 IDM PPO SMART Expert     

> t= 0 t=T

Figure 18: Qualitative comparison of traffic agent models. We visualize rollouts of IDM, PPO, SMART, expert and the conditioned PPO traffic agents (top to bottom) on the same scenario at four time steps over T = 3 s (left to right). Agents are shown with their past trajectories. 31 IDM PPO SMART Expert     

> t= 0 t=T

Figure 19: Qualitative comparison of traffic agent models. We visualize rollouts of IDM, PPO, SMART, expert and the conditioned PPO traffic agents (top to bottom) on the same scenario at four time steps over T = 3 s (left to right). Agents are shown with their past trajectories. 32 IDM PPO SMART Expert     

> t= 0 t=T

Figure 20: Qualitative comparison of traffic agent models. We visualize rollouts of IDM, PPO, SMART, expert and the conditioned PPO traffic agents (top to bottom) on the same scenario at four time steps over T = 3 s (left to right). Agents are shown with their past trajectories. 33 IDM PPO SMART Expert     

> t= 0 t=T

Figure 21: Qualitative comparison of traffic agent models. We visualize rollouts of IDM, PPO, SMART, expert and the conditioned PPO traffic agents (top to bottom) on the same scenario at four time steps over T = 3 s (left to right). Agents are shown with their past trajectories. 34 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: All claims and contributions stated in the abstract and introduction are de-scribed in detail in the main paper and supported by our empirical results. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A [No] or [N/A] answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We discuss the limitations of BehaviorBench in the conclusion paragraph, including the lack of traffic lights and stop signs, and the behavior of our reward-conditioned traffic agents. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper has no limitation while the answer [No] means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate “Limitations” section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? 35 Answer: [N/A] Justification: The paper does not include any theoretical results and therefore contains no proofs. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The main paper describes the benchmark splits, traffic agents, evaluation metrics, and our hybrid planner. Hyperparameters and training details are provided in the Appendix. We also provide the code to reproduce the results. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a [No] answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 36 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We release the code for generating our scenario splits and the full evaluation framework, enabling reproduction of all reported results. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://neurips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so [No] is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //neurips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyperpa-rameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: All training and evaluation details are provided in the main paper and appendix. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [No] Justification: Each evaluation is run on a fixed set of 1,000 scenarios per split, which provides stable aggregate metrics, we do not report error bars due to the computational cost of repeated training runs. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer [Yes] if the results are accompanied by error bars, confidence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. 37 • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g., negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, the authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We report the GPU type, training time, and memory requirements in the Appendix. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: Our work uses publicly available driving datasets and simulators, involves no human subjects or personal data, and conforms with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics in every respect. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer [No], they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [N/A] 38 Justification: The paper introduces an evaluation framework and benchmark for autonomous driving planners. As a methodological contribution that does not deploy a system, it has no direct societal impact beyond that of the underlying research area. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer [N/A] or [No], they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate Deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pre-trained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [N/A] Justification: The released artifacts are evaluation code and benchmark splits, which do not pose a high risk of misuse. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: All datasets, simulators, and planner implementations used in this work are cited at first use, and we comply with their respective licenses and terms of use. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not use existing assets. 39 • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The released code includes documentation covering the scenario splits, evalua-tion framework, and usage instructions to reproduce our results. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [N/A] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing or research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [N/A] 40 Justification: The paper does not involve research with human subjects and therefore does not require IRB approval. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigor, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [N/A] Justification: LLMs were not used as part of the core methodology. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy in the NeurIPS handbook for what should or should not be described. 41