Title: Guided Streaming Stochastic Interpolant Policy

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.10051v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 02:10:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Guided Streaming Stochastic Interpolant Policy 

Puming Jiang 1,‡, Meiyi Wang 2,‡, Kelvin Lin 3, Ce Hao 4 and Harold Soh 5

School of Computing, National University of Singapore 

> ‡

Equal contribution Email: {p.jiang 1, meiyi.wang 2, cehao 4}@u.nus.edu, {klinzw 3, harold 5}@nus.edu.sg 

Abstract —Inference-time guidance is essential for steering generative robot policies toward dynamic objectives without re-training, yet existing methods are largely confined to chunk-based architectures that exhibit high latency and lack the reactivity needed for test-time preference alignment or obstacle avoidance. In this work, we formally derive the optimal guidance term for Stochastic Interpolants (SI) by analyzing the value function’s time evolution via the Backward Kolmogorov Equation, establishing a modified drift that theoretically guarantees sampling from a target distribution. We apply this framework to real-time control through the Streaming Stochastic Interpolant Policy (SSIP), which generalizes the deterministic Streaming Flow Policy (SFP). Unifying this guidance law with the streaming architecture enables fast and reactive control. To support diverse deployment needs, we propose two complementary mechanisms: training-free Stochastic Trajectory Ensemble Guidance (STEG) that computes gradients on-the-fly for zero-shot adaptation, and training-based Conditional Critic Guidance (CCG) for amortized inference. Empirical evaluations demonstrate that our guided streaming approach significantly outperforms conventional chunk-based policies in reactivity and provides superior, physically valid guidance for dynamic, unstructured environments. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Modern generative approaches, such as Diffusion Mod-els [20, 12, 4] and Flow Matching [16, 17], excel at cap-turing complex, multi-modal behaviors from demonstrations. However, their standard formulations do not explicitly account for the dynamic constraints of physical deployment. In real-world settings, a robot must not only imitate demonstrated motion but also adapt to safety constraints (e.g., obstacles) and evolving user preferences absent from the training data. Consequently, the utility of a policy is determined not only by its base capabilities, but also by how readily it can be steered at inference time toward additional objectives during execution, without the cost of retraining. This capability is essential for deploying generative policies in unstructured, real-world environments and is commonly referred to as inference-time guidance . Originally introduced for controlled image generation [7], inference-time guidance has since been adapted to robot control to enforce safety constraints [9, 6] and to align behavior with human prefer-ences [22]. However, existing guidance methods are largely tailored to chunk-based policies, such as Diffusion Policy [4], and inherit their limitations. In particular, actions must be generated for an entire chunk before execution begins, intro-ducing latency and often leading to discontinuous motion [14]. Moreover, once a chunk is committed, execution proceeds open-loop over the chunk horizon, preventing adaptation to Collision due to locked 

> horizon
> Conventional
> Guidance for Chunk
> Policies
> Real time
> avoidance within
> chunk
> Ours: Guided
> Streaming Stochastic
> Interpolant Policy

CCG 

> Training -based Guidance

STEG 

> Training -free Guidance
> Two Complementary Guidance Methods:

!! "!,$,%,&Parallel Rollouts 

Fig. 1: We contribute a principled inference-time guidance framework for streaming generative policies. It enables fast reactive behavior within the action chunk, and can be deployed in either a training-based or training-free manner. objectives that change mid-execution (e.g., moving obstacles). As a result, these methods are suboptimal for dynamic envi-ronments, as illustrated in Fig. 1. To address this challenge at a fundamental level, we ground our approach in the framework of Stochastic Interpolants 

(SI) [1]. SI provides a unifying formulation that encompasses score-based diffusion models (SDEs) [20] and flow matching methods (ODEs) [16, 17]. It has also been applied to robot policies to exploit the property that sampling need not origi-nate from pure Gaussian noise, which accelerates the inference process [3]. While guidance mechanisms are well established for standard diffusion models, a rigorous treatment within the more general SI framework remains underexplored. In this work, we first derive the optimal inference-time guidance for Stochastic Interpolants. This formulation is gen-eral and extends beyond policy guidance. We then pro-pose the Streaming Stochastic Interpolant Policy (SSIP) , a streaming generative control framework that addresses the latency and motion smoothness limitations of chunk-based policies [3]. Similar to very recent work on streaming flow policies (SFP) [14], SSIP aligns generative evolution with the robot’s physical execution time to enable incremental action generation during execution. However, unlike prior 

> arXiv:2605.10051v1 [cs.RO] 11 May 2026

streaming approaches, SSIP instantiates the more general Stochastic Interpolant framework. This changes the dynamics from a deterministic Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) to a Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE), rendering the streaming policy mathematically compatible with the optimal inference-time guidance derived for SI. With the theoretical guidance formulation and the SSIP backbone established, we propose two complementary strate-gies for computing the guidance gradient:  

> •

Stochastic Trajectory Ensemble Guidance (STEG): Atraining-free approach utilizing parallel inference-time rollouts. By backpropagating through the differentiable trajectory ensemble, STEG estimates the guidance gra-dient on-the-fly for zero-shot adaptation.  

> •

Conditional Critic Guidance (CCG): A training-based approach that amortizes the utility gradient into a learned critic network, which offers efficient inference for known obstacle classes. Experiments on Push-T and Robomimic show that our uni-fied framework improves latency and reactivity over existing guided Diffusion and Flow-Matching policies. For example, in the challenging Push-T Chase setting, chunk-based DP and FP achieve only 12.0% and 8.0% success, while SSIP variants maintain 30.0–36.0%. We further validate the framework on a real Panda robot for moving-obstacle avoidance and position-preference grasping, demonstrating its applicability beyond simulation. II. B ACKGROUND & R ELATED WORK 

Generative Robot Policies. Recent work has applied gen-erative modeling to robot policy learning, commonly using action chunking to represent complex behaviors by predict-ing fixed-horizon action sequences (e.g., at:t+H ). Represen-tative examples include Diffusion Policy (DP) [4], Flow Policies (FP) [16], and Action Chunking with Transformers (ACT) [28]. Despite their expressiveness, these approaches require generating an entire action chunk prior to execution and operate open-loop within each chunk, with feedback incorporated only at chunk boundaries. Recent methods such as Consistency Policy [18], One-Step Diffusion Policy [23], and DPPO [19] improve the speed or performance of chunk-based diffusion policies; using smaller chunks can also shorten the open-loop horizon. Real-time chunking methods such as RTC [2] further improve asynchronous execution of chunk-based policies via inpainting and cross-chunk continuity. These directions are complementary to our focus on deriving test-time guidance for execution-time-aligned policies. Very recent work on Streaming Flow Policies (SFP) [14] removes the reliance on action chunking by modeling action trajectories directly as flow trajectories. By aligning generative flow time with physical execution time, SFP enables incre-mental action generation and reduces latency while preserving performance. Our work builds on this execution-time-aligned perspective and studies how to equip streaming policies with principled test-time guidance. 

Stochastic Interpolants. Stochastic Interpolants (SI) [1] pro-vide a unified framework that connects flow-based generative models (probability-flow ODEs) and diffusion-based models (SDEs). Given endpoint densities ρ0 and ρ1, SI defines a family of intermediate marginals {ρt}t∈[0 ,1] via a stochastic interpolant 

xt = I(t, x0, x1, u) + γ(t)z, z ∼ N (0, I), (1) where (x0, x1) ∼ π has marginals ρ0, ρ 1, u is an auxiliary la-tent variable, I satisfies the endpoint conditions, and typically 

γ(0) = γ(1) = 0 . The induced density ρt satisfies a transport equation and a family of forward/backward Fokker–Planck equations with a tunable diffusion coefficient ϵ(t), leading to associated ODE/SDE samplers (e.g., a forward SDE of the form dxt = b(xt, t )dt + p2ϵ(t) dWt). For simplicity, we assume independent couplings and omit u. In robotics, Chen et al. [3] leverage conditional stochastic interpolants to bridge from informative (non-Gaussian) source policies, improving few-step policy diffusion performance. 

Inference-time Guidance. Inference-time guidance methods, popularized in image synthesis through classifier guidance [7] and related energy- or loss-based guidance schemes [10, 26], modify the sampling process using gradients derived from auxiliary likelihoods, costs, or differentiable constraints. Re-lated formulations include posterior-sampling methods with diffusion or flow priors, e.g., DPS [5], DAPS [27], and FlowDPS [15], as well as optimal-control-based flow guidance such as OC-Flow [21]; these methods mainly target inverse problems or general controlled generation. In robotics, inference-time guidance has been used to enforce safety constraints, temporal-logic specifications, and kinematic requirements [22, 9, 25, 6, 11]. Most existing approaches rely on diffusion- or flow-based policies [4, 8, 13] that generate complete action chunks in a single inference step. While effective for static objectives, this open-loop execution paradigm exhibits the commitment problem [24], limiting responsiveness to time-varying constraints and dynamic en-vironments. 

Our contributions. We extend SI-based policies [3] to a 

guided streaming formulation, improving efficiency and reac-tivity. In doing so, we develop a general inference-time con-ditioning framework for general stochastic interpolants. When instantiated for robot control, this framework enables online adaptation to test-time constraints. From a complementary per-spective, we generalize SFP from deterministic to stochastic dynamics, which permits a principled derivation of inference-time guidance using the Feynman–Kac representation and the Doob h-transform. This stochastic-path perspective provides a natural route to guided streaming control, where stochasticity serves as the mathematical structure enabling the guidance derivation rather than as a claim of superior performance over flow matching. III. G UIDED STREAMING STOCHASTIC INTERPOLANT 

POLICIES (G UIDED SSIP) Our main objective is to sample from a conditional target distribution defined over complete trajectories q(τ | ξ), where 

τ denotes a trajectory over the horizon [0 , T ] (a path in action/state space) and ξ is an exogenous context (e.g., a goal specification or an observation/history embedding). This target is constructed by reweighting a base dynamics distribution 

p(τ | ξ) via a scalar cost function J(τ ; ξ):

q(τ | ξ) = 1

Zξ

p(τ | ξ)e−J(τ ;ξ) (2) where Zξ = R p(τ | ξ)e−J(τ ;ξ)dτ is the global partition function. The cost function J(τ ; ξ) encapsulates any inference-time objective used to guide the robot, such as obstacle avoidance or alignment with human preferences. In this section, we establish the theoretical framework for Guided Streaming Stochastic Interpolant Policies. First, we derive the optimal guidance law for general stochastic interpolants (Section III-A). Next, we introduce our spe-cific architecture, the Streaming Stochastic Interpolant Policy (SSIP), which generalizes the deterministic Streaming Flow Policy (SFP) into a Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) to provide the necessary support for this guidance (Section III-B). Finally, we bridge global trajectory objectives and instantaneous control by deriving the action target conditional over the current time step (Section III-C). This yields a utility function that is compatible with the martingale-based guidance law, justifying its direct application to the streaming setting (Section III-D). 

A. Optimal Guidance for Stochastic Interpolants 

We derive the exact guidance law for a general conditional Stochastic Interpolant [1] whose base dynamics evolve over a generic state xt and are governed by the diffusion 

dxt = b(xt, t, ξ ) dt + p2ϵ(t) dWt, (3) where b is the base drift, ϵ(t) ≥ 0 is an isotropic diffusion schedule, and Wt is a standard Wiener process. Our global objective (Eq. (2)) defines a path-space reweighting of the base trajectory measure conditional on ξ:

ptarget (τ0: T | ξ) ∝ pbase (τ0: T | ξ)e−J(τ0: T ,ξ ), (4) where J(τ0: T , ξ ) is a trajectory-level cost. For the remainder of this subsection, we assume a standard time-additive form 

J(τ0: T , ξ ) = 

Z T

> 0

c(xs, s, ξ ) ds + ϕ(xT , ξ ), (5) which includes pure terminal costs as the special case c ≡ 0.

Desirability and the martingale condition. Let {F t} denote the natural filtration of the base process (3). Define the global 

likelihood-ratio process 

Dt ≜ Ebase 

e−J(τ0: T ,ξ ) | F t



Z(ξ) (6) where Z(ξ) ≜ Ebase [exp ( −J(τ0: T , ξ ))] . By construction and the tower property, {Dt}t∈[0 ,T ] is a (nonnegative) martingale with E[Dt] = 1 . Under the additivity assumption (5) and Markovity of (3), the conditional expectation in (6) factorizes into a sunk past factor and a future desirability: 

Ebase 

h

e−J(τ0: T ,ξ ) | F t

i

=exp 



−

Z t

> 0

c(xs, s, ξ )ds 



u(xt, t, ξ ), (7) where the desirability (a.k.a. exponentiated future utility) is 

u(x, t, ξ ) ≜

Ebase 

"

exp −

Z Tt

c(xs, s, ξ ) ds − ϕ(xT , ξ )

!

xt = x

#

(8) Applying Itˆ o’s lemma to the martingale in (7) yields the (backward) Feynman–Kac equation satisfied by u:

∂tu(x, t, ξ ) + Ltu(x, t, ξ ) − c(x, t, ξ ) u(x, t, ξ ) = 0 , (9) with u(x, T, ξ ) = e−ϕ(x,ξ ), and the time-dependent generator 

Ltf = b(x, t, ξ ) · ∇ xf + ϵ(t) ∆ xf. (10) In the pure terminal-cost case ( c ≡ 0), (9) reduces to the homogeneous backward Kolmogorov equation ∂tu+Ltu = 0 .

Optimal drift via a Doob h-transform. We now characterize the dynamics under the tilted path measure (4). Using (6) as the Radon-Nikodym derivative on Ft, Itˆ o calculus together with (9) gives 

dD t = Dt

p2ϵ(t) ∇x log u(xt, t, ξ ) · dWt. (11) By Girsanov’s theorem, under the tilted measure the process remains a diffusion with the same diffusion coefficient and a shifted drift: 

dxt =

h

b(xt, t, ξ ) + 2 ϵ(t) ∇x log u(xt, t, ξ )

i| {z }

> ˜b(xt,t,ξ )

dt +p2ϵ(t) d fWt,

where fWt is a Wiener process under the tilted measure. Therefore, the exact guidance modification is 

∆b(x, t, ξ ) ≜ ˜b(x, t, ξ ) − b(x, t, ξ ) = 2 ϵ(t) ∇x log u(x, t, ξ ).

(12) This result is the continuous-time analogue of KL-minimal control; we obtain the target path reweighting (4) by adding the smallest possible (in relative-entropy) drift correction con-sistent with the tilted measure. 

B. Streaming Stochastic Interpolant Policy (SSIP) 

We define SSIP as an execution-time-aligned diffusion policy whose time-indexed marginals follow a stochastic in-terpolant path. This is strictly more general than any par-ticular deterministic streaming flow; deterministic policies arise as special cases (e.g., drift-only samplers or zero-noise interpolants), while the diffusion formulation is what enables principled guidance via the stochastic control results (in Sec-tion III-A). Here, the diffusion state is xt = at and context ξ = h

denotes a snapshot of the policy context at the current control cycle (e.g., observation/history embedding). Within a single SSIP rollout over t ∈ [0 , T ], we treat h as fixed, similar to SFP [14]. Within each action chunk, while the history h

remains fixed, each new drift is computed using the last action as input. This ensures reactivity, unlike conventional methods where the entire chunk is computed simultaneously. Then, a stochastic interpolant policy specifies a family of conditional marginals {pt(a | h)}t∈[0 ,T ] by constructing a noised sample as 

at = It(h, ζ ) + γ(t) z, z ∼ N (0, I), (13) where: (i) It(h, ζ ) is a reference interpolant (“signal path”) that may be deterministic given h or may depend on alatent ζ capturing structured trajectory variation, and (ii) γ(t)

is a smooth scalar noise schedule controlling the marginal perturbation scale (often chosen to be small near the endpoints and larger mid-horizon). Note that Eq. (13) defines a path of marginals used for training (by sampling fresh z for each 

(t, h)); it does not mean that a single fixed z is carried through time as a Brownian path. The continuous-time sampler is an SDE driven by a Wiener process dWt (defined below). Eq. (13) is the policy-level instance of Eq. (1): the generic state xt corresponds to the action at, and the interpolant is conditioned on the policy context h.To realize the marginal path induced by (13) at inference time, we use a diffusion with drift decomposed into a transport term and a score term. Let 

sθ (a, t, h) ≈ ∇ a log pt(a | h)

denote a learned score, and let vθ (a, t, h) denote a learned transport/velocity field. We define the SSIP sampling dynamics as the one-parameter family 

dat =

h

vθ (at, t, h) +  ϵ(t)−γ(t) ˙ γ(t) sθ (at, t, h)

i

dt +

p2ϵ(t) dWt, (14) where ϵ(t) ≥ 0 controls the amount of stochasticity injected during sampling. The term −γ(t) ˙ γ(t) sθ is the deterministic correction associated with the marginal noising schedule γ(t);the additional ϵ(t) sθ and p2ϵ(t) dWt provide a tunable stochastic sampler. In the idealized setting where sθ equals the true score, different choices of ϵ(t) correspond to different samplers that target the same marginal path, trading off exploration versus determinism. SSIP cleanly separates two conceptually different kinds of “randomness”:  

> •

Structured variation (model diversity): randomness in 

It(h, ζ ) (e.g., latent-conditioned behaviors or multimodal skills). This represents genuine alternative behaviors the policy has learned.  

> •

Sampling diffusion (exploration noise): stochasticity con-trolled by ϵ(t) and realized by the Wiener process dWt.This is an inference-time knob that enables exploration and supports principled guidance. We can recover the deterministic streaming flow policy by using a drift-only sampler, 

dat

dt = vθ (at, t, h) − γ(t) ˙ γ(t) sθ (at, t, h). (15) and choosing a noise-free interpolant ( γ(t) ≡ 0). This is the deterministic counterpart of (14) and is the default at execution when low-noise trajectories are preferred. Then, (15) reduces to ˙at = vθ (at, t, h). Specific constructions such as “Gaussian-tube” stabilizing dynamics correspond to particular choices of 

It and vθ (and optionally a latent ζ), but are not required by the SSIP framework. We provide an extended SSIP formulation and training details in Appendix A. 

C. Derivation of the Target Conditional 

SSIP operates by sampling the current action/state at time 

t from an implicit generative distribution. To apply the trajectory-level target in Eq. (2), we derive the induced target conditional over the current action given the realized past. For clarity, we write trajectories as τ0: T = ( a0, . . . , aT ). At decision time t, the realized history up to but excluding the current action is fixed, i.e., τ0: t−1 is given and at is the decision variable 1.As before, the global target over complete trajectories is 

ptarget (τ0: T | ξ) = 1

Zξ

pbase (τ0: T | ξ)e−J(τ0: T ,ξ ). (16) For readability, we suppress ξ in the remainder of the deriva-tion in this subsection. By marginalizing future trajectories 

τt+1: T , the target conditional over the current action is 

ptarget (at | τ0: t−1) = 

Z

ptarget (τt:T | τ0: t−1) dτ t+1: T . (17) Using (16) and dropping normalization constants that do not depend on at yields 

ptarget (at | τ0: t−1) ∝

Z

pbase (τt:T | τ0: t−1)e−J(τ0: T )dτ t+1: T . (18) We can factor the base conditional into two components, 

pbase (τt:T | τ0: t−1) = 

pbase (at | τ0: t−1)

| {z }

> Current Action

pbase (τt+1: T | τ0: t−1, at)

| {z }

> Future Rollout

. (19) Substituting (19) into (18) and pulling out the at-dependent term gives 

ptarget (at | τ0: t−1) ∝

pbase (at | τ0: t−1)Eτt+1: T ∼pbase (·| τ0: t−1,at)

h

e−J(τ0: T )i

. (20)    

> 1We will work with discrete time-steps, but the derivation for continuous time is identical if we replace τ0: t−1with the filtration Ft.

Under additive costs (Eq. (5)), the trajectory cost splits as 

J(τ0: T ) = J(τ0: t−1) + J(τt:T ), where J(τ0: t−1) is fully determined by the fixed past. Therefore, 

E

h

e−J(τ0: T ) | τ0: t−1, at

i

= e−J(τ0: t−1)E

h

e−J(τt:T ) | τ0: t−1, at

i

, (21) and the prefactor e−J(τ0: t−1) cancels in (20) because it is independent of at. Define the (unnormalized) utility of the current action as the expected exponentiated future cost: 

u(at, t, τ 0: t−1) ≜ Eτt+1: T ∼pbase (·| τ0: t−1,at)

h

e−J(τt:T )i

(22) Then the exact target conditional is 

ptarget (at | τ0: t−1) ∝ pbase (at | τ0: t−1) u(at, t, τ 0: t−1). (23) 

D. Guiding Streaming Policies 

To guide SSIP, we apply the general result of Section III-A to the SSIP base sampler (14). Define the SSIP base drift 

bθ (a, t, h) ≜ vθ (a, t, h) +  ϵ(t) − γ(t) ˙ γ(t)sθ (a, t, h). (24) Let the streaming desirability (future utility) be 

u(at, t, h) ≜ Eτt+1: T ∼pbase (·| at,t, h)[exp( −J(τt:T ))] . (25) Then the guided SSIP dynamics are obtained by adding the optimal correction ∆b = 2 ϵ(t)∇a log u:

dat =

h

bθ (at, t, h) + 2 ϵ(t)∇a log u(at,t, h)

i

dt +

p2ϵ(t) dWt. (26) Reactivity is ensured by receding-horizon execution: after exe-cuting an action from the current rollout, we compute the next step based on the current action at and the utility calculated at that specific timestep, which reflects the instantaneous future trajectory cost J(τt:T ). In practice, the remaining challenge is estimating ∇a log u efficiently at inference time, which we address in the following section. IV. G UIDANCE FOR ON-THE -FLY OBSTACLES 

As shown above, the optimal guidance drift is propor-tional to the gradient of the log-expected future utility: 

∇a log E[e−J(τt:T )]. While this formulation provides a theo-retical foundation for constraint satisfaction, computing this gradient exactly is often computationally intractable, as it necessitates differentiating through an expectation over a high-dimensional distribution of future trajectories. To bridge this gap, we propose two complementary strategies tailored to different deployment requirements, described below. 

A. Stochastic Trajectory Ensemble Guidance (STEG) 

To enable zero-shot adaptation, we propose Stochastic Tra-jectory Ensemble Guidance (STEG). This method leverages the differentiability of our SSIP backbone to construct a Monte Carlo estimator of the utility gradient ∇a log E[e−J(τ )] on-the-fly. Estimating the guidance gradient using a finite set of sample trajectories introduces two primary sources of error: 

Distributional Shift (failure to cover safe modes) and Dynam-ics Mismatch (incorrect gradient direction). In Appendix B, we provide an error decomposition of the guidance score. Our analysis suggests two critical design principles for a valid estimator:  

> •

High-Fidelity Support ( N ↑): The estimator must employ a large ensemble size to minimize the selection error aris-ing from the multi-modal nature of the safety posterior.  

> •

Physics-Consistent Gradients: The rollout mechanism must preserve causal derivatives ( ∂at+k/∂ at) to ensure the guidance force respects system kinematics. STEG implements these principles by combining parallel sampling with differentiable physics. At inference time, STEG approximates the intractable ex-pectation Eτ [e−J(τ )] by simulating a batch of N parallel chains. We use the learned SDE dynamics itself as the transition model, conditioning on the snapshot context h and holding it fixed throughout the K-step rollout. The process consists of three steps: 1) Stochastic Ensemble Rollout. We replicate the current state at into an ensemble {a(i) 

> t

}Ni=1 . We then unroll the dynamics for K steps using the Euler-Maruyama discretization of the base SSIP generative SDE. 2) Utility Aggregation. During the rollout, we accumu-late the running cost for each trajectory J(τ (i)) =

PKk=1 c(a(i) 

> k

)∆ t, where c(·) is the additive cost function (e.g., repulsive potential). We then estimate the log-expected utility by employing the Log-Sum-Exp (LSE) estimator: 

ˆV(at) = LogSumExp 



{− J(τ (i))}Ni=1 



− log N

≈ log E[e−J ] (27) 3) Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT). The optimal guidance drift is the gradient of this value estimate. Leveraging automatic differentiation, we compute the gradient w.r.t. the current action at by backpropagating through the unrolled graph: 

∆b(at, t, h) = 2 ϵ(t) · ∇ at

ˆV(at) (28) In summary, STEG provides a principled, training-free mechanism for inference-time guidance by directly estimating the utility gradient through differentiable stochastic rollouts. STEG enables robust zero-shot adaptation to novel objectives while preserving the smoothness and reactivity of the un-derlying SSIP dynamics. This makes STEG well-suited for unstructured and rapidly changing environments, where safety constraints and task objectives cannot be anticipated at training time. 

B. Conditional Critic Guidance (CCG) 

To achieve real-time reactivity, we propose Conditional Critic Guidance (CCG), where we train a parameterized critic network Vψ to approximate the guidance potential directly. Since the base SSIP policy generates actions autoregressively, the distribution of future trajectories is inherently conditioned on the robot’s history. Consequently, the value function must account for this temporal context. We parameterize the critic as Vψ (at, t, h, ϕ ), where h represents the history context (e.g., observation history) used by the base policy, and ϕ represents the parameters defining the cost (e.g., human preferences or obstacle positions). In the following sections, we specifically use ϕ to denote obstacle parameters. The network is trained to approximate a scalar value ytarget derived from future rollouts: 

Vψ (at, t, h, ϕ ) ≈ ytarget (at, h, ϕ ) (29) Here, ytarget estimates the log-desirability log u(at, t, h) in Eq. (25), whose gradient yields the guidance correction in Eq. (26) for inducing the target conditional in Eq. (23). In practice, CCG is most effective in structured environ-ments where obstacle classes and cost functions are known at training time. By amortizing the guidance computation into a learned critic, CCG enables low-latency inference when prior knowledge is available. 

C. Summary of the Main Method 

In summary, Guided SSIP proceeds in three steps. First, we instantiate the streaming SI sampler with the base drift in Eq. (24). Second, at each execution step, we estimate the log-desirability log u(at, t, h): STEG estimates it online through short-horizon stochastic rollouts, while CCG amortizes it with a trained critic. Third, we apply the guidance correction in Eq. (26) and execute the resulting action in a receding-horizon manner. The full inference procedures are given in Alg. 1 for STEG and Alg. 2 for CCG. V. E XPERIMENTS 

We designed our experiments to investigate the following research questions: (Q1 ) How does our method compare to conventional guidance techniques in static environments? (Q2 ) Does our method demonstrate adaptability when en-countering dynamic or unexpectedly appearing obstacles compared to baseline techniques? (Q3 ) What is the computational overhead of STEG compared to CCG with pre-trained critics, and what are the re-spective strengths and weaknesses of each approach in real-time scenarios? 

A. Experimental Setup 

To answer these questions, we integrate our streaming guidance techniques with the SSIP and evaluate them on obstacle avoidance in two simulation domains: the Push-T task and simulated robot manipulation in Robosuite. All base policies are trained on datasets containing only collision-free 

demonstrations. During evaluation, we introduce unmodeled static and dynamic obstacles to assess the capabilities of our proposed guidance framework. 

Baselines and SSIP Variants. We compare our methods against two baselines: conventional action chunk-based dif-fusion policy (DP) with energy-based guidance [13] and flow-policy (FP) with flow-guidance [8]. For SSIP, we compare TABLE I: Experimental results on the Push-T task with static obstacles. We compare Task Success Rate (SR) and Inference Latency. Our guided SSIP methods outperform the baselines in terms of success rate with lower latency. Bold indicates the best performance.                   

> Category Method SR% (↑)Latency (ms) Baseline DP 58.5 91.52 FP 56.0 7.78
> SSIP Repulsion 68.6 11.37 STEG 66.7 18.49 CCG-D 65.7 13.72 CCG-P 74.3 14.75

the STEG and CCG guidance methods against a simple repulsion method (a simple additive residual control based on the distance to obstacles that works well in practice). For STEG guidance, we use K = 3 rollout steps with N = 64 

parallel rollouts for Push-T and K = 4 rollout steps with 

N = 32 parallel rollouts for Robomimic. For CCG guidance, we employ two different critics trained with the following costs: 1) Distance Potential Cost (CCG-D): the regression target approximates the log-expected future utility log E[e−J ]

by aggregating cumulative distance costs from rollouts. 2) Collision Proxy Cost (CCG-P): the target is a collision-risk proxy computed from future rollouts (based on 

minimum distance and approach angle). This relaxes the additive-cost assumption required for the exact Doob-transform guidance, but provides a practical, reactive guidance field. 

Evaluation Protocols. Guided policies exhibit varying sen-sitivity to the guidance scale λ, which controls the trade-off between task performance and safety. To ensure a fair and comprehensive comparison, we adopt two complementary evaluation protocols:  

> •

Peak Performance Metrics. We perform a grid search over 

λ and report results at the configuration that achieves the highest task success rate (SR). A trajectory is considered successful if its final reward exceeds a task-specific threshold (85%, corresponding to a slight relaxation to account for necessary avoidance maneuvers). We addi-tionally report inference latency, defined as the average wall-clock time required to generate a single action step 2. 

> •

Safety-Reward Trade-off. We sweep λ and report the Pareto frontier of average reward versus safety rate (1 − Collision Rate). Methods closer to the top-right cor-ner exhibit stronger task performance while maintaining higher safety. 

B. Push-T with Static Obstacles 

On this task, the robot has to complete the task (push the T-block into a particular goal configuration) without colliding      

> 2All evaluations were conducted on a workstation with an AMD EPYC 7543 processor and a single A5000 GPU. 0.825 0.850 0.875 0.900 0.925 0.950

Average Reward 

> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> Safety Rate
> FP
> DP
> CCG-P
> CCG-D
> STEG

Fig. 2: Safety-Reward trade-off. SSIP consistently achieves more favorable trade-offs compared to the baselines, with its Pareto frontiers closer to the top-right corner of the re-ward–safety plane. Among the SSIP variants, CCG-P domi-nates across the evaluated range, while STEG outperforms the CCG-D variant. Conditional Critic Guidance Avoiding Oscillate Obstacles  

> Conditional Critic Guidance Avoiding Static Obstacles
> Unguided Guided

Fig. 3: SSIP with CCG-P guidance in static and dynamic obstacle tasks. Red arrows ( →) represent the base policy while blue arrows ( →) represent guidance. We can observe the guidance acts to push the end-effector away from the obstacles. with any of eight static obstacles. We execute the base policy and filter for instances where it achieves task success but experiences collisions, yielding a set of approximately 100 cases per method. 

Results. Table I reports success rate and inference latency on Push-T with static obstacles. Overall, SSIP improves task success relative to conventional chunk-based guidance base-lines, addressing Q1 . In particular, CCG-P achieves the high-est success rate (74.3%) while maintaining low per-step la-tency (14.75 ms), outperforming classifier-guided DP (58.5%, 91.52 ms) and flow-guided FP (56.0%, 7.78 ms). Notably, a simple repulsion residual already performs strongly in this static setting (68.6%, 11.37 ms), indicating that local distance-based avoidance is often sufficient when obstacles are fixed. Crucially, the per-step latency reported for conventional baselines represents an amortized metric. To reflect the true control latency, this value must be multiplied by the execution chunk size ( Hexecute =8 ), as these methods generate the entire action sequence simultaneously. Consequently, the robot faces a “wait-then-act” bottleneck resulting in unsmooth execution, a limitation also identified in SFP [14]. The distance-based instantiations of our principled guidance—CCG-D (65.7%, 13.72 ms) and STEG with short-horizon rollouts K=3 (66.7%, 18.49 ms)—are comparable to, and slightly below, repulsion: they optimize essentially the same distance signal but incur additional approximation error from critic regression (CCG-D) or finite-sample, short-horizon Monte Carlo estimation (STEG). This highlights a key trade-off for Q3 : CCG amortizes guidance into a critic for lower-latency inference, whereas STEG adds overhead due to online rollouts but remains training-free and broadly applicable. The trade-off curves shown in Fig. 2 are consistent with this view. SSIP yields a more favorable safety–reward trade-off than the chunk-based baselines, with Pareto frontiers consis-tently closer to the top-right region of the reward–safety plane. Among SSIP variants, CCG-P dominates across the swept guidance scales, maintaining high safety at comparable (or higher) reward. STEG improves over conventional baselines and generally exceeds CCG-D, but exhibits a less favorable trade-off than CCG-P in the high-reward regime, indicating a sharper safety degradation as reward is pushed upward. 

C. Push-T with Dynamic Obstacles 

To test reactivity, we introduce dynamic obstacles during the robot’s execution. The obstacles follow three distinct move-ment patterns, increasing in kinematic difficulty: Intercept 

moves predictably toward the trajectory midpoint, Oscillate 

moves back and forth around the robot’s nominal path, and 

Chase continuously follows the end-effector, making within-horizon adaptation most challenging. 

Results. Table II shows that dynamic obstacles substantially amplify the limitations of chunk-based baselines, highlighting the benefit of streaming reactivity. In the simplest Intercept 

setting, DP and FP remain competitive (72–76%), and SSIP with CCG-P matches the best baseline (76%), suggesting that when obstacle motion is predictable and brief, chunk-based guidance can still recover. As obstacle dynamics become more adversarial, SSIP vari-ants separate more clearly from the baselines. Under Oscillate ,CCG-P achieves the highest success (68%), outperforming both DP (38%) and FP (50%), indicating that continuous, TABLE II: Experimental results on the Push-T task with dynamic obstacles. We evaluate the Task Success Rate (SR) across three distinct obstacle motion patterns: moving towards the trajectory midpoint (Intercept), oscillating around the mid-point (Oscillate), and chasing the end-effector (Chase).                      

> Success Rate (SR%) ↑
> Category Method Intercept Oscillate Chase
> Baseline DP 72.0 38.0 12.0 FP 76.0 50.0 8.0 SSIP Repulsion 64.0 54.0 30.0 CCG-P 76.0 68.0 30.0 STEG 68.0 56.0 36.0

TABLE III: Robomimic Simulation Results (Success Rate). 

We report the Success Rate (SR %) across three tasks.                      

> Success Rate (SR%) ↑
> Category Method Lift Square Can
> Baseline DP 71.0 58.0 51.0 FP 72.0 48.0 51.0 SSIP Repulsion 35.0 32.0 14.0 STEG 45.0 50.0 51.0 CCG-P 73.0 79.0 78.0

online guidance is particularly effective when constraints change within an execution horizon. The most challenging 

Chase regime further stresses within-horizon adaptation; both chunk-based baselines collapse (12% for DP, 8% for FP), while SSIP methods retain markedly higher success (30–36%). Notably, STEG performs best in Chase (36%), consistent with the advantage of training-free, on-the-fly gradient estimation when obstacle behavior deviates from training-time conditions. Overall, these results suggest a regime shift; chunk-based guidance is brittle under rapidly changing constraints, while SSIP enables substantially higher success. CCG-P excels in moderately dynamic settings and STEG provides the strongest robustness in the most adversarial motion pattern. 

D. Simulation Robot Experiment 

We conduct experiments on three canonical Robomimic tasks: Lift , Can , and Square . We introduce unmodeled static obstacles that intersect the nominal demonstration trajectories, which requires the agent to deviate to succeed. We evaluate 100 trials per baseline per task. 

Results. Table III reports success rates across the three Robomimic tasks. Overall, SSIP with CCG-P guidance achieves the strongest performance, substantially outperform-ing all baselines across tasks. This result highlights the benefit of amortized, history-aware guidance when reliable prior struc-ture is available. Among the remaining SSIP variants, STEG consistently improves over the simple repulsion baseline but underperforms CCG-P. This gap is most pronounced in tasks where the obstacle directly intersects the nominal trajectory, CCG Successful Executions   

> CCG Failure Cases
> Lifting Failure Target Toppled
> Lift Can
> Obstacle Collision
> Square

Fig. 4: Visualization of CCG execution across three Robomimic tasks, including representative failure examples. Blue arrows indicate the guidance force. suggesting that finite-horizon stochastic rollouts can struggle to discover sufficiently long-horizon detours under coarse discretization. Nevertheless, STEG still provides meaningful gains over heuristic guidance without requiring offline train-ing. In contrast, the repulsion-based method performs poorly across all tasks, indicating that local reactive penalties are insufficient to resolve obstacle interference while preserving task completion. This contrasts with the Push-T case, where simple repulsion did not significantly disrupt policy execu-tion. Finally, conventional Diffusion and Flow Policies exhibit performance better than STEG, indicating that they can still provide reasonable guidance forces in high-dimensional spaces when the reward function remains static within the chunk. Analysis of failed episodes for CCG-P and STEG reveals two primary failure modes: insufficient avoidance (leading to collision) and task interference (leading to non-completion). Collisions (Fig. 4, bottom right) typically stem from the distributional constraints of the base policy. Since our guidance method operates by reweighting the learned trajectory distri-bution, it struggles to synthesize flexible avoidance behaviors if such kinematic diversity is absent from the training dataset. Conversely, task failures (e.g., failure to lift, Fig. 4, bottom left; or knocking over the can, Fig. 4, bottom middle) arise when guidance gradients directly conflict with task execution. For instance, in lifting tasks, strong repulsive forces effectively cancel out the necessary vertical actuation when the planner fails to identify a feasible lateral detour. 

E. Real Robot Experiment 

We further evaluated the methods on a real Franka Panda robot across two task types: moving-obstacle avoidance and position-preference grasping, where the robot is guided to TABLE IV: Real Robot Results (Success Rate).                       

> Moving Obstacles Position Method Slow-Steady Slow-Diverse Fast Preference DP 65 25 585 SSIP-Na¨ ıve 40 65 55 90 SSIP-STEG 90 75 55 95
> SSIP-CCG 90 75 65 90 Moving Obstacle Avoidance Grasp Different Position

Fig. 5: Real Robot Experiment on moving-obstacle avoidance and position-preference grasping. grasp different parts of a mug, such as the handle or the body. For moving-obstacle avoidance, the three settings vary in the speed and diversity of the obstacle trajectories, and each set-ting is tested over 20 trials. As shown in Table IV, guided DP often struggles with fast-moving obstacles: it either responds only when the obstacle is already close or produces abrupt eva-sive motions that interfere with task execution. These results also support our claim that our guidance formulation improves over naive guidance, which uses only repulsion/attraction heuristics and does not explicitly account for the execution of the underlying task. The position-preference experiment fur-ther demonstrates that our framework can support inference-time objectives beyond obstacle avoidance, enabling the robot to grasp different parts of the mug according to the specified preference. In addition, we observe the same trend as reported in SFP [14]: streaming policies tend to produce smoother trajectories than diffusion-policy-style generation. VI. C ONCLUSION , L IMITATIONS , AND FUTURE WORK 

This paper presented a principled framework for inference-time steering of generative robot policies together with a streaming execution substrate. We derived the optimal guid-ance law for Stochastic Interpolants and instantiated it in a 

Streaming Stochastic Interpolant Policy (SSIP) that generates actions incrementally, avoiding the “wait-then-act” bottleneck inherent to chunk-based architectures. Empirically, SSIP im-proves reactivity relative to chunk-based diffusion and flow-policy baselines across both static and dynamic obstacle settings. The proposed guidance instantiations exhibit com-plementary strengths: CCG provides low-latency, amortized steering when task and constraint structure is available at training time, whereas STEG enables training-free adaptation via on-the-fly gradient estimation under distribution shift. Across benchmarks, we find that effective inference-time steering is regime-dependent and shaped jointly by the execu-tion architecture and the objective surrogate. On Robomimic tasks with unmodeled obstacles intersecting nominal demon-strations, simple local repulsion performs poorly, indicating that successful avoidance often requires task-aware deviations rather than purely reactive distance penalties. In contrast, SSIP with amortized guidance (CCG-P) substantially improves success, suggesting that history- and cost-conditioned crit-ics can learn structured, goal-preserving avoidance behaviors when representative deployment conditions are observed dur-ing training. Training-free STEG also improves over repulsion, but underperforms CCG-P in settings requiring longer-horizon detours, consistent with limitations from finite-horizon roll-outs and coarse discretization. Complementing these static-obstacle results, Push-T with dynamic obstacles highlights the brittleness of chunk-based policies under within-horizon constraint changes, while streaming SSIP maintains higher success; notably, STEG provides the strongest robustness in the most adversarial Chase regime, consistent with the benefits of online adaptation. 

Limitations and Future Work. We identify two primary limitations. First, the policy is constrained by the support of the training trajectory distribution, which can restrict kinematic flexibility during close-range avoidance. Second, STEG op-erates over a finite prediction horizon, limiting its ability to anticipate obstacles that require longer-term planning. These effects compound: limited horizon discourages early detours, while distributional constraints hinder late-stage maneuvering. Future work will focus on extending the effective look-ahead horizon of streaming guidance, for example through longer-horizon rollouts or hierarchical planning interfaces. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This research / project is supported by the National Re-search Foundation, Singapore, under its Thematic Competitive Research Programme 2025 (NRF-T-CRP-2025-0003) REFERENCES 

[1] Michael Albergo, Nicholas M Boffi, and Eric Vanden-Eijnden. Stochastic interpolants: A unifying framework for flows and diffusions. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 26(209):1–80, 2025. [2] Kevin Black, Manuel Y Galliker, and Sergey Levine. Real-time execution of action chunking flow policies. In 

The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Informa-tion Processing Systems , 2025. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=UkR2zO5uww. [3] Kaiqi Chen, Eugene Lim, Kelvin Lin, Yiyang Chen, and Harold Soh. Don’t Start From Scratch: Behavioral Refinement via Interpolant-based Policy Diffusion. In 

Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , Delft, Netherlands, July 2024. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2024.XX. 122. [4] Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shuran Song. Dif-fusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2023. [5] Hyungjin Chung, Jeongsol Kim, Michael Thompson Mc-Cann, Marc Louis Klasky, and Jong Chul Ye. Diffusion posterior sampling for general noisy inverse problems. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [6] Haoyuan Deng, Wenkai Guo, Qianzhun Wang, Zhenyu Wu, and Ziwei Wang. Safebimanual: Diffusion-based trajectory optimization for safe bimanual manipulation. In 9th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2025. [7] Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis. Advances in neural information processing systems , 34:8780–8794, 2021. [8] Ruiqi Feng, Chenglei Yu, Wenhao Deng, Peiyan Hu, and Tailin Wu. On the guidance of flow matching. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning ,2025. [9] Zeyu Feng, Hao Luan, Pranav Goyal, and Harold Soh. LTLDoG: Satisfying temporally-extended symbolic con-straints for safe diffusion-based planning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2024. [10] Alexandros Graikos, Nikolay Malkin, Nebojsa Jojic, and Dimitris Samaras. Diffusion models as plug-and-play priors. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:14715–14728, 2022. [11] Ce Hao, Kelvin Lin, Zhiwei Xue, Siyuan Luo, and Harold Soh. Disco: Language-guided manipulation with diffusion policies and constrained inpainting. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2025. [12] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural infor-mation processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020. [13] Michael Janner, Yilun Du, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Sergey Levine. Planning with diffusion for flexible behavior synthesis. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2022. [14] Sunshine Jiang, Xiaolin Fang, Nicholas Roy, Tom´ as Lozano-P´ erez, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Siddharth An-cha. Streaming flow policy: Simplifying diffusion /

flow-matching policies by treating action trajectories as flow trajectories. In 9th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2025. [15] Jeongsol Kim, Bryan Sangwoo Kim, and Jong Chul Ye. Flowdps: Flow-driven posterior sampling for inverse problems. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 12328–12337, 2025. [16] Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matthew Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [17] Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and Qiang Liu. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow. In The Eleventh International Con-ference on Learning Representations , 2023. [18] Aaditya Prasad, Kevin Lin, Jimmy Wu, Linqi Zhou, and Jeannette Bohg. Consistency policy: Accelerated visuo-motor policies via consistency distillation. In Robotics: Science and Systems , 2024. [19] Allen Z. Ren, Justin Lidard, Lars Lien Ankile, Anthony Simeonov, Pulkit Agrawal, Anirudha Majumdar, Ben-jamin Burchfiel, Hongkai Dai, and Max Simchowitz. Diffusion policy policy optimization. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. [20] Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [21] Luran Wang, Chaoran Cheng, Yizhen Liao, Yanru Qu, and Ge Liu. Training free guided flow-matching with optimal control. In The Thirteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2025. [22] Yanwei Wang, Lirui Wang, Yilun Du, Balakumar Sun-daralingam, Xuning Yang, Yu-Wei Chao, Claudia P´ erez-D’Arpino, Dieter Fox, and Julie Shah. Inference-time policy steering through human interactions. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-tion (ICRA) , pages 15626–15633. IEEE, 2025. [23] Zhendong Wang, Max Li, Ajay Mandlekar, Zhenjia Xu, Jiaojiao Fan, Yashraj Narang, Linxi Fan, Yuke Zhu, Yo-gesh Balaji, Mingyuan Zhou, Ming-Yu Liu, and Yu Zeng. One-step diffusion policy: Fast visuomotor policies via diffusion distillation. In Forty-second International Con-ference on Machine Learning , 2025. [24] Han Xue, Jieji Ren, Wendi Chen, Gu Zhang, Yuan Fang, Guoying Gu, Huazhe Xu, and Cewu Lu. Reactive dif-fusion policy: Slow-fast visual-tactile policy learning for contact-rich manipulation. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2025. [25] Sixu Yan, Zeyu Zhang, Muzhi Han, Zaijin Wang, Qi Xie, Zhitian Li, Zhehan Li, Hangxin Liu, Xinggang Wang, and Song-Chun Zhu. M 2 diffuser: Diffusion-based trajectory optimization for mobile manipulation in 3d scenes. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-gence , 2025. [26] Jiwen Yu, Yinhuai Wang, Chen Zhao, Bernard Ghanem, and Jian Zhang. Freedom: Training-free energy-guided conditional diffusion model. In 2023 IEEE/CVF Inter-national Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 23117–23127, 2023. doi: 10.1109/ICCV51070.2023. 02118. [27] Bingliang Zhang, Wenda Chu, Julius Berner, Chenlin Meng, Anima Anandkumar, and Yang Song. Improving diffusion inverse problem solving with decoupled noise annealing. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 20895–20905, 2025. [28] Tony Z Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with low-cost hardware. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2023. APPENDIX AEXTENDED FORMULATION OF SSIP In this section, we provide the rigorous mathematical deriva-tion of the Streaming Stochastic Interpolant Policy (SSIP), extending the formulation presented in Sec. III. We detail how SSIP generalizes the deterministic Streaming Flow Policy (SFP) [14] into the Stochastic Interpolant framework [1], enabling the derivation of the guidance law used in our main results. 

A. Deterministic Backbone: Streaming Flow Policy (SFP) 

We begin with the underlying deterministic structure defined by SFP. Unlike standard diffusion policies that generate strictly coupled action chunks, SFP aligns the flow time t with the robot’s execution time. Let ξ ∈ RT ×D denote the ground-truth demonstration trajectory (the target data). SFP constructs a probability path concentrated around ξt, conceptually forming a “Gaussian Tube”: 

pSF P (at|ξ) = N (ξt, σ 2(t)I) (30) where σ(t) = σ0e−kt describes a contracting variance sched-ule with stabilizing gain k > 0 and initial dispersion σ0. The vector field governing this probability path follows the linear Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE): 

dat

dt = vSF P (at|ξ) = ˙ξt − k(at − ξt) (31) In SFP, a velocity network vθ (at, t ) is trained to regress this target field. However, the resulting dynamics are fundamen-tally deterministic, precluding the direct application of score-based guidance which requires a diffusive term. 

B. Stochastic Interpolation Mechanism 

SSIP upgrades this deterministic backbone into a Stochastic Interpolant. Consistent with the definition in Eq. (1) of the main text, we define the stochastic process at as a superposi-tion of the deterministic interpolant I(t, ·) and an independent noise process: 

at = ξt + σ(t)ϵ

| {z }  

> I(t,... )(SFP Backbone)

+ γ(t)z

| {z } 

> SI Noise

(32) where:  

> •

ϵ ∼ N (0, I) represents the variance of the underlying valid behavior (inherited from SFP).  

> •

z ∼ N (0, I) is the auxiliary noise introduced by SSIP for diffusive sampling.  

> •

γ(t) is the interpolant noise schedule (e.g., γ(t) ∝pt(1 − t)), distinct from the flow variance σ(t).This formulation effectively “inflates” the deterministic Gaus-sian tube into a stochastic probability cloud, admitting a valid score function ∇ log ρt(at) required for our guidance derivation. 

C. Training Objectives 

To realize the SDE-based inference, we estimate two fields: the transport velocity vθ and the score function sθ .

1) Velocity Matching: The velocity network vθ (at, t ) learns the stabilizing vector field of the underlying flow. It is trained to regress the SFP drift even when the input state is perturbed by the additional SI noise: 

Lvel (θ) = Et, ξ,ϵ,z

∥vθ (at, t ) − vSF P (aSF P t |ξ)∥2 (33) where aSF P t = ξt + σ(t)ϵ is the unperturbed SFP state. 

2) Score Matching: The denoiser network ηθ (at, t ) esti-mates the added SI noise z. This is trained via standard denoising score matching: 

Lscore (θ) = Et, at,z

∥ηθ (at, t ) − z∥2 (34) The analytical score of the conditional distribution is then given by sθ (at, t ) ≈ − ηθ (at,t ) 

> γ(t)

.We avoid directly regressing the score function because it scales with 1/γ (t), which leads to numerical instability as 

t → 0 or t → 1. Instead, we adopt the noise-prediction parameterization proposed in the original SI framework [1] and utilized in [3], which ensures stable training objectives. 

D. Inference via Stochastic Differential Equation 

As introduced in Eq. (2) of the main text, the marginal density of the SSIP process satisfies the Fokker-Planck equa-tion associated with a generic SDE. By combining the learned velocity and score, we derive the specific form of the drift 

b(at, t ) for SSIP: 

dat = b(at, t )dt + p2ϵ(t)dWt (35) The drift b that preserves the marginals of Eq. (32) is [1]: 

b(at, t ) = vθ (at, t ) + ( ϵ(t) − γ(t) ˙ γ(t)) 

| {z }

> Diffusivity Correction

sθ (at, t ) (36) Here, ϵ(t) is the user-defined diffusivity schedule. This formu-lation is the theoretical foundation for our guidance methods (STEG and CCG), as the presence of the diffusion term p2ϵ(t)dWt and the score term sθ allows for the injection of the guidance gradient ∇J as a bias to the score. APPENDIX BTHEORETICAL ANALYSIS OF TEST -T IME ESTIMATION 

In this section, we provide a rigorous error decomposition of the guidance gradient estimated by STEG. We quantify the gap between our estimator and the true physical oracle, justifying our design choices of using a differentiable ensemble (STEG) and the “Large-N , Small-K” strategy. 

A. Unified Formulation: The Posterior Force 

We adopt a pathwise perspective based on the repa-rameterization trick to derive the guidance law. Let the true physical dynamics be represented by the deterministic mapping τ = Φ phy (a, ϵ), where a is the control action and 

ϵ ∼ p(ϵ) represents the inherent physical stochasticity. 1) The Physical Oracle ( S∗): We define the optimal guid-ance score S∗(a) as the gradient of the log-expected utility under the true physics. This formulation aligns with the derivation in Section III-D, omitting the scaling factor for simplicity: 

S∗(a) = ∇a log Eϵ

h

e−J(Φ phy (a,ϵ)) i

(37) By applying the reparameterization trick , the expectation is taken over the fixed distribution of ϵ, while the gradient is computed with respect to a. This allows us to move the gradient operator inside the expectation. We first apply the log-derivative identity ∇ log Z = ∇ZZ :

S∗(a) = ∇aEϵ

e−J(Φ phy (a,ϵ)) 

Eϵ

e−J(Φ phy (a,ϵ))  (38) Next, we apply the chain rule to the term e−J(τ ):

∇ae−J(τ ) = e−J(τ ) · (−∇ aJ(τ )) = e−J(τ )



−∇ τ J(τ ) · ∂Φphy 

∂a

| {z }

> Backpropagated Force

(39) Substituting this back into the numerator of Eq. (38): 

S∗(a) = Eϵ

e−J(τ ) (−∇ τ J(τ ) · Jphy (τ )) 

Eϵ

e−J(τ ) (40) where Jphy (τ ) = ∂Φphy  

> ∂a

is the Jacobian of the physical dynamics. To interpret this geometrically, we define the Physical Safe Posterior distribution psaf e (τ |a). This corresponds to the physical distribution p(τ |a) re-weighted by the safety utility: 

psaf e (τ |a) := p(τ |a)e−J(τ )

Eτ ′∼p[e−J(τ ′)]

| {z } 

> Normalization Constant Z

(41) Observing that the denominator in our score equation is exactly the normalization constant Z, we can rewrite the oracle gradient as an expectation under this safe posterior: 

S∗(a) = Eτ ∼psaf e (·| a) [Fphy (τ, a)] (42) Here, Fphy (τ, a) ≜ −∇ τ J(τ )·Jphy (τ ) represents the Physical Repulsive Force for a single trajectory—the vector indicating how to adjust a to reduce the collision cost J given a specific physical realization ϵ.

2) The Estimator Gradient ( ˆS): Since the ground truth physical oracle is inaccessible, STEG approximates future trajectories. We define an estimator distribution q(τ |a) via the learned differentiable surrogate τ = Φ est (a, z), where z is the noise injected during the SDE rollout. Analogous to the physical derivation, the STEG gradient (computed via Log-SumExp in our implementation) mathematically approximates the expectation of the modeled force under the estimator’s safe posterior qsaf e :

ˆS(a) = Eτ ∼qsaf e (·| a) [Fest (τ, a)] (43) where Fest ≜ −∇ τ J(τ ) · Jest (τ ) uses the Jacobian of the learned velocity network Jest = ∂Φest  

> ∂a

.

B. Rigorous Error Decomposition 

To quantify the estimation error ∆S(a) = ˆS(a) − S∗(a),we add and subtract the intermediate term Epsaf e [Fest ] (the estimated force evaluated on true physical trajectories). This decomposes the error into two structurally distinct sources: 

∆S(a) = Eqsaf e [Fest ] − Epsaf e [Fphy ]=  Eqsaf e [Fest ] − Epsaf e [Fest ]| {z }

> Term I: Distributional Shift

+ Epsaf e [Fest − F phy ]

| {z }

> Term II: Dynamics Mismatch

(44) 

1) Term I: Distributional Shift (Coverage Error): Term I measures the support mismatch between the estimator q and the physics p. 

> •

Problem: If the physical safety landscape is multi-modal (e.g., passing an obstacle on the left or right) but the estimator q is too narrow or uses a single deterministic rollout, qsaf e may collapse to a single mode or miss the safe region entirely.  

> •

STEG Solution (Large-N ): STEG minimizes this by generating a large ensemble ( N ≥ 30 ) with stochastic noise injection. This ensures that the support of q asymp-totically covers the high-probability regions of psaf e ,driving Term I to zero. 

2) Term II: Dynamics Mismatch (Jacobian Error): Term II measures the alignment error between the modeled and physical dynamics, weighted by the safety of the trajectory.  

> •

Problem: Even if the trajectories are kinematically sim-ilar, if the Jacobians diverge ( Jest ̸ = Jphy ), the guidance force will point in a physically invalid direction (e.g., commanding instantaneous lateral motion for a non-holonomic robot).  

> •

STEG Solution (Differentiable Physics): By unrolling the Euler integration of the learned velocity field vθ ,STEG enforces structural similarity between Φest and 

Φphy . This ensures that Jest ≈ Jphy , minimizing Term II. 

C. Practical Strategy: Large-N , Small-K

Based on this decomposition, we justify the specific hyper-parameters used in STEG. The estimation error is practically dominated by Selection Error (finite samples) and Jacobian Drift (long-horizon divergence). 

a) 1. Large-N for Selection Error ( ϵsel ): The safety posterior psaf e effectively acts as a Softmax gating function. To accurately estimate the expectation Eqsaf e , the ensemble must contain at least a few ”survivor” particles that have low cost. For a cluttered environment with success probability 

ρ ≪ 1, the probability of ensemble failure is (1 − ρ)N .By utilizing SIMD parallelism to scale N (Large-N ), we exponentially decay this selection error without increasing wall-clock latency. b) 2. Small-K for Low Latency (Efficiency vs. Accuracy): 

Since the rollout steps must be executed sequentially, the horizon length K constitutes the primary bottleneck for wall-clock inference time. Increasing K linearly increases latency, potentially compromising the robot’s ability to react to sudden changes. To ensure real-time performance (e.g., control frequencies 

> 20 Hz), STEG adopts a “Small-K, Large-∆t” strategy (e.g., K = 3 /4). While a larger integration step ∆t inevitably introduces some discretization error (a form of dynamics mismatch), we observe that the guidance gradient for obstacle avoidance is robust to this approximation. The repulsive force is dominated by the relative geometry of impending collisions; a coarse trajectory that correctly captures the existence of a collision is sufficient to yield a valid avoidance direction. Thus, we prioritize minimizing latency over minimizing integration error, as delayed reactions are far more detrimental to safety than slightly approximate gradients. APPENDIX CGUIDANCE IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 

We provide implementation details for our two proposed guidance mechanisms: the training-free Stochastic Trajectory Ensemble Guidance (STEG) and the amortized Conditional Critic Guidance (CCG). 

A. Stochastic Trajectory Ensemble Guidance (STEG) 

STEG computes guidance gradients on-the-fly via parallel simulations. The hyperparameters are selected to balance the trade-off between gradient variance and inference latency (as analyzed in Appendix B):  

> •

Ensemble Size (N ): We employ an ensemble of N

parallel trajectories. This size strikes a balance between covering diverse modes in the action distribution and maintaining computational efficiency. 

– Push-T: N = 64 

– Robomimic: N = 32  

> •

Rollout Horizon ( K): We adopt a short-horizon strategy (denoted as K) to minimize inference latency. 

– Push-T: K = 3 steps 

– Robomimic: K = 4 steps  

> •

Integration Step ( ∆t): We utilize a coarse discretization step size of ∆t to facilitate efficient gradient estimation during the rollout phase. 

– Push-T: ∆t = 0 .15 

– Robomimic: ∆t = 0 .1

B. Conditional Critic Guidance (CCG) 

To reduce inference latency, CCG amortizes the rollout computation into a learned value function Vψ .

1) Network Architecture: We employ a ResNet-based critic with 6 hidden layers of size 1024. The network Vψ (at, t, h, ϕ )

conditions on the current action at, diffusion time t, the history embedding h (extracted from the frozen policy encoder), and obstacle parameters ϕ.

2) Training Objective: We train the critic using a regression approach anchored by Monte Carlo rollouts collected from the frozen base policy. For a sampled tuple (at, h, ϕ ), we simulate 

K parallel future trajectories {τ (k)}Kk=1 using the base SSIP dynamics and compute an empirical target value ytarget . The network minimizes the L2 regression loss: 

L = E ∥Vψ (at, t, h, ϕ ) − ytarget ∥2 (45) 

3) Cost Variants: We instantiate two variants of CCG by defining different regression targets ytarget based on the rollout outcomes:  

> •

CCG-D (Distance Potential): The target approximates the log-expected future utility, ytarget ≈ log E[e−J(τ )].The trajectory cost is defined as the cumulative distance potential: J(τ ) = P exp 



− ∥x−xobs ∥2

> 2σ2



. 

> •

CCG-P (Collision Proxy): The target ytarget is a prob-abilistic collision risk computed from the ensemble’s statistics. 

– For 3D manipulation tasks (Robomimic), we em-ploy a hybrid risk metric combining minimum distance and approach alignment (aiming proba-bility) to encourage early avoidance: ytarget =max( Pcollision , λ · Paiming ).

– For the 2D Push-T task , we utilize purely the col-lision probability ( ytarget = Pcollision ) derived from the minimum distance. Empirical analysis revealed that the aiming term in this highly dynamic task introduced gradient instability without improving avoidance success. This variant relaxes the strict additive-cost assumption of the Doob-h transform but provides a practical, highly reactive guidance field for dynamic obstacles. Algorithm 1 SSIP Inference with Stochastic Trajectory Ensemble Guidance (STEG) 

Require: SSIP Policy πθ , Ensemble Size N , Horizon K, Obstacle ϕ, Scale λ, Activation Dist dact , Policy Horizon H,Execution Horizon Hexec  

> 1:

{— Initialization — } 

> 2:

Get initial observation oinit from environment  

> 3:

Initialize latent action trajectory a0 from oinit  

> 4:

∆t ← 1/H {Step size for flow integration } 

> 5:

for env step i = 0 to Nmax do  

> 6:

Get observation o from environment  

> 7:

t ← Clip (( i (mod Hexec )) · ∆t, 0, 1) {Flow time aligned with execution } 

> 8:

{— 1. Base Flow Drift — } 

> 9:

Predict velocity: vθ ← πθ .velocity (at, t, o) 

> 10:

Predict score: sθ ← πθ .score (at, t, o) 

> 11:

Compute base drift: bbase ← vθ − (γ(t) ˙ γ(t)) sθ {Probability Flow ODE } 

> 12:

{— 2. Stochastic Ensemble Guidance — } 

> 13:

Calculate distance: dobs ← ∥ Denormalize (at) − ϕ∥ 

> 14:

if dobs < d act then  

> 15:

Enable gradient: ain ← at.requires grad ()  

> 16:

Ensemble Rollout: A(0) ← Repeat (ain , N ) 

> 17:

Initialize cost: C ← 0 ∈ RN 

> 18:

for k = 0 to K − 1 do  

> 19:

t′ ← t + k∆tsim  

> 20:

Predict drift: Bdrif t ← πθ (A(k), t ′, o) 

> 21:

SDE Step: A(k+1) ← A(k) + Bdrif t ∆tsim + σ√∆tsim Z 

> 22:

Accumulate Cost: C ← C + J(A(k+1) , ϕ ) · ∆tsim  

> 23:

end for  

> 24:

Utility: U ← − C 

> 25:

Log-Sum-Exp: L ← log PNn=1 exp( Un) {Soft-max over ensemble trajectories } 

> 26:

Compute Gradient: gteg ← ∇ aL 

> 27:

Dynamic Weighting: wdyn ← λ · (1 − dobs /d act ) {Linear ramp-up based on proximity } 

> 28:

Guided Drift: btotal ← bbase + wdyn · gteg  

> 29:

else  

> 30:

btotal ← bbase  

> 31:

end if  

> 32:

{— 3. Streaming Integration — } 

> 33:

Update trajectory: anext ← at + btotal · ∆t 

> 34:

aphys ← Denormalize (anext ) 

> 35:

Execute aphys in environment  

> 36:

{— 4. Streaming Handoff — } 

> 37:

if (i + 1) (mod Hexec ) == 0 then  

> 38:

at=0 ← Re-Initialize (o) {Shift to next chunk } 

> 39:

else  

> 40:

at ← anext {Pass updated trajectory to next step } 

> 41:

end if  

> 42:

end for Algorithm 2 SSIP Inference with Conditional Critic Guidance (CCG) 

Require: SSIP Policy πθ , Critic Vψ , Obstacle ϕ, Scale λ, Power k, Policy Horizon H, Execution Horizon Hexec  

> 1:

{— Initialization — } 

> 2:

Get initial observation oinit from environment  

> 3:

Initialize latent action trajectory a0 from oinit  

> 4:

∆t ← 1/H {Step size for flow integration } 

> 5:

for env step i = 0 to Nmax do  

> 6:

Get observation o from environment  

> 7:

t ← Clip (( i (mod Hexec )) · ∆t, 0, 1) {Flow time aligned with execution } 

> 8:

{— 1. Base Flow Drift — } 

> 9:

Predict velocity: vθ ← πθ .velocity (at, t, o) 

> 10:

Predict score: sθ ← πθ .score (at, t, o) 

> 11:

Compute base drift: bbase ← vθ − (γ(t) ˙ γ(t)) sθ {Probability Flow ODE } 

> 12:

{— 2. Adaptive Critic Guidance — } 

> 13:

if λ > 0 then  

> 14:

Enable gradient: ain ← at.requires grad ()  

> 15:

Predict Risk Logit: vrisk ← Vψ (ain , t, o, ϕ ) 

> 16:

Collision Probability: prisk ← σ(vrisk ) 

> 17:

Soft Gating: wdyn ← λ · (prisk )k {Power scaling suppresses guidance in safe states } 

> 18:

Compute Gradient: gv ← ∇ avrisk {Gradient w.r.t Logit value } 

> 19:

Guided Drift: btotal ← bbase − wdyn · gv 

> 20:

else  

> 21:

btotal ← bbase  

> 22:

end if  

> 23:

{— 3. Streaming Integration — } 

> 24:

Update trajectory: anext ← at + btotal · ∆t 

> 25:

aphys ← Denormalize (anext ) 

> 26:

Execute aphys in environment  

> 27:

{— 4. Streaming Handoff — } 

> 28:

if (i + 1) (mod H)exec == 0 then  

> 29:

at=0 ← Re-Initialize (o) {Shift to next chunk } 

> 30:

else  

> 31:

at ← anext {Pass updated trajectory to next step } 

> 32:

end if  

> 33:

end for APPENDIX DEXPERIMENTAL DETAILS 

In this section, we provide detailed hyperparameters, en-vironment configurations, and training procedures to ensure reproducibility. 

A. Environment and Task Setup 

We evaluate our method on two domains: the 2D planar Push-T task and the 3D Robomimic manipulation suite. 

1) Push-T Task: The goal is to push a T-shaped block to a target pose. The state space consists of the robot end-effector position and the block pose (position and angle).  

> •

Observation Space: Low-dimensional state vector, in-cluding agent position (x, y ) and block pose (x, y, θ ). 

> •

Action Space: Continuous control space (2D position for Push-T; End-effector pose for Robomimic). The model outputs the drift term used to evolve the action state at. 

> •

Simulation Horizon: T = 250 steps.  

> •

Control Frequency: 10 Hz.  

> •

Obstacle Configuration: We introduce both static and dynamic obstacles to rigorously test reactivity. 

– Static Obstacles: 8 circular obstacles are placed at fixed locations to form a cluttered environment. 

– Dynamic Obstacles: We implement three distinct dynamic behaviors to evaluate different aspects of avoidance: 1) Active Interception: The obstacle is initialized at an offset from a future waypoint on the reference trajectory. It moves linearly to intercept the target point with a fixed velocity profile designed to reach the interception point within T = 50 steps, effectively creating a “moving roadblock” that forces the agent to brake or detour. Once the target is reached (or time limit exceeded), the obstacle halts to block the path. 2) Sinusoidal Oscillation: The obstacle oscillates perpendicular to the nominal trajectory anchor point. Its position p(t) evolves as: 

p(t) = panchor + A · sin(2 πf t ) · v⊥ (46) where amplitude A = 40 pixels, frequency 

f ≈ 0.03 (normalized step frequency), and v⊥

is the unit vector perpendicular to the trajectory tangent. 3) Chasing: The obstacle actively pursues the agent’s current position pagent . The velocity is updated using a proportional controller with in-ertia: 

vt+1 = (1 −α)vt +α·vmax 

pagent − pt

∥pagent − pt∥ (47) where α = 0 .4 is the turn rate (simulating inertia) and vmax = 3 .0 is the chase speed. 

2) Robomimic Tasks: We use the standard Lift, Can, and Square tasks from the Robomimic suite.  

> •

Observation Space: Low-dimensional state vector con-sisting of the object state and proprioceptive states (e.g., end-effector pose and gripper joint positions).  

> •

Action Space: Continuous control space (End-effector pose for Robomimic).  

> •

Simulation Horizon: T = 400 steps.  

> •

Control Frequency: 20 Hz.  

> •

Obstacle Configuration: Unmodeled static obstacles are placed to intersect the nominal demonstration trajectories, forcing the agent to deviate. 

B. Policy Architecture and Training 

We compare our Streaming Stochastic Interpolant Policy (SSIP) against Diffusion Policy (DP) and Flow Policy (FP). Table V summarizes the hyperparameters for the Robomimic experiments. For the Push-T experiments, we trained SSIP and FP from scratch, while utilizing the fully converged DP checkpoints provided by [14]. All policies employ the same backbone architecture and parameters as detailed in Table V and were trained to convergence, achieving high rewards. 

C. Baseline Implementation Details 

To ensure a fair comparison, we implemented two categories of baseline guidance mechanisms: Gradient-based Conven-tional Guidance (for DP and FP) and Naive Guidance based on analytical potential fields (for our SSIP). 

1) Diffusion Policy with Reconstruction Guidance [13]: 

This method follows the classifier-guidance paradigm, utiliz-ing the intermediate diffusion state xt to estimate the clean trajectory x0 for gradient calculation. 

a) Reconstruction & Gradient Injection.: At each reverse diffusion step t, we estimate the clean data ˆx0 from the current noisy sample xt and the noise prediction ϵθ (xt) using Tweedie’s formula: 

ˆx0 = xt − √1 − ¯αtϵθ (xt)

√¯αt

(48) We define a distance-based cost function J(ˆ x0) on this es-timated trajectory. The gradient ∇xt J(ˆ x0) is computed via backpropagation and injected into the noise prediction: 

ˆϵ = ϵθ (xt) + w(t)√1 − ¯αt∇xt J(ˆ x0) (49) We observed that ˆx0 estimates are inaccurate during the early stages of generation. Therefore, we employ a time-dependent weight w(t) scaled by the signal-to-noise ratio to prevent incorrect guidance early in the process. 

2) Flow Policy Guidance [8]: For the flow matching policy, we employ a lookahead mechanism that linearly extrapolates the future state using the current velocity field. 

a) Lookahead Extrapolation.: During the ODE integra-tion step t ∈ [0 , 1] , we predict the terminal state ˆx1 using the current velocity vθ (xt, t ):

ˆx1 = xt + vθ (xt, t ) · (1 − t) (50) TABLE V: Hyperparameters for Policy Training                                   

> Parameter SSIP (Ours) Diffusion Policy (DP) Flow Policy (FP)
> Backbone Architecture ConditionalUnet1D ConditionalUnet1D ConditionalUnet1D Hidden Dimensions [256, 512, 1024] [256, 512, 1024] [256, 512, 1024] Optimizer AdamW AdamW AdamW Learning Rate 1e-4 1e-4 1e-4 Batch Size 64 64 64 Action Horizon ( H)16 16 16 Execution Horizon ( Hexec )8 (Streaming) 8 (Chunking) 8 (Chunking) Noise Schedule γ(t)0.1pt(1 −t)Squared Cosine σ0exp( −kt )
> Training Epochs 1200 1200 1200

The gradient of the cost function ∇xt J(ˆ x1) is used to modify the velocity field directly: 

dxt = ( vθ (xt, t ) − λ(t) · ∇ xt J(ˆ x1)) d t (51) Due to the numerical instability of gradients near obstacles, explicit gradient normalization (clamping) is essential for stability. 

3) Naive Repulsive Guidance (SSIP): As a non-learning baseline, this method applies an analytical repulsive potential field directly to the action space without backpropagation. We apply this to the drift term of the SSIP. 

a) Repulsive Force: We define a repulsive vector based solely on the geometric distance d between the current trajec-tory point xt and the obstacle xobs :

Frep = λ ·



max 



0, 1 − ddact 

 2

· xt − xobs 

∥xt − xobs ∥ (52) This force is superposed onto the base velocity: vf inal =

vbase + Frep .

D. Evaluation and Compute Resources 1) Metrics Definition:  

> •

Task Success: A trajectory is considered successful if no collision and the final reward exceeds 85% (Push-T) or if the object is successfully placed/lifted (Robomimic).  

> •

Inference Latency: Measured as the average wall-clock time per control step. Note that for chunk-based baselines (DP, FP), the generation time is amortized over the execution chunk size ( Hexec = 8 ). 

2) Compute Hardware: All experiments and latency mea-surements were conducted on a workstation with the following specifications:  

> •

CPU: AMD EPYC 7543 Processor.  

> •

GPU: Single NVIDIA RTX A5000.  

> •

Framework: PyTorch with CUDA acceleration. 

E. Complete Trade-off Plot 

Figure 6 presents the complete Pareto frontier of safety versus task performance. We observe several additional key trends: 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 

Average Reward 

> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> Safety Rate
> FP
> DP
> Naive
> CCG-P (ODE)
> CCG-P (SDE)
> CCG-D (ODE)
> STEG (ODE)
> STEG (SDE)

Fig. 6: Comprehensive Safety-Reward trade-off (Average Re-ward vs. Safety Rate) across various baselines. We primarily report ODE variants in the main text, as the stochastic noise introduced by SDE inference was found to degrade perfor-mance. 

a) Impact of Stochasticity (SDE vs. ODE): A notable finding is the performance gap between ODE-based and SDE-based inference. While SDEs theoretically offer better explo-ration, we find that in the context of high-frequency streaming control ( 20 Hz), the injected noise ( γ(t)z) disrupts the tempo-ral coherence of the trajectory. The ”jitter” introduced by the SDE solver makes fine manipulation tasks (e.g., precise block alignment in Push-T) difficult to stabilize, leading to lower Average Rewards. Consequently, the noise-free ODE formu-lation serves as a stronger backbone for reactive guidance. We therefore report the ODE-based inference results in the main text. 

b) Baseline Comparison: The energy-guided Diffusion Policy (DP) exhibits a sharp drop in reward as the guidance scale increases, without yielding significant gains in safety. We attribute this to the fundamental limitations of policies trained on proficient human datasets, which inherently lack the kinematic diversity required for flexible avoidance. While our method is subject to similar distributional constraints, the issue is significantly mitigated; the continuous nature of SSIP allows us to increase the guidance scale to effectively force a lateral detour, whereas similar scaling in DP destabilizes the generation process.