Title: A 3D Isovist World Model – Revealing a City's Unseen Geometry and Its Emergent Cross-City Signature

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.03609v2

Published Time: Thu, 04 Jun 2026 01:09:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# A 3D Isovist World Model: Revealing a City’s Unseen Geometry and Its Emergent Cross-City Signature 

Xuhui Lin 

The Bartlett School of Sustainable Construction University College London, UK 

Stephen Law 

Department of Geography University College London, UK 

Nanjiang Chen 

School of Project Management, Faculty of Engineering The University of Sydney, AU 

Kunyao Li 

School of Engineering Cardiff University, UK 

Tao Yang ∗

School of Architecture Tsinghua University, Beijing, CN 

# Abstract 

Embodied agents that navigate cities rely on world models that predict how their surroundings will change as they move. But for navigation, what matters is not what the buildings look like; it is where the agent can go. Most world models nonetheless predict appearance, learning how a scene looks rather than the space an agent can move through. Those that do target geometry, such as bird’s-eye-view occupancy grids, flatten the three-dimensional environment onto a ground plane, discarding the above-ground and multi-level structure that shapes real navigation. What is missing is a predictive target that captures the navigable geometry an agent actually traverses, without photometric entanglement and without collapsing the third dimension. Our key idea is to model the open volume between buildings, the 

negative space , encoded as a 3D isovist : a spherical visibility-depth map recording the distance to the nearest surface in every direction. We introduce an embodied world model that predicts the next isovist from a short history of past isovists and a movement action. The prediction is formulated as a depth residual so the decoder inherits sharp building edges, trained with self-rollout scheduled sampling 

to keep corrupted context on the geometry manifold, and equipped with a persistent latent bird’s-eye-view spatial map for cross-path consistency. Our central finding is emergent and unexpected: a single city-blind model trained on Manhattan and Paris develops a cross-city spatial signature , with city identity linearly decodable from its temporal latents far above single-frame baselines, so the signature lives in the learned dynamics rather than in appearance. The representation is lightweight, interpretable, and reproducible, offering a geometric substrate for spatial reasoning in embodied AI, robotics, and urban analysis, released with an open dataset and pipeline. 

Keywords: Isovist, World Model, Embodied Navigation, Negative Space, Urban Morphology. 

> ∗Corresponding author. Preprint.
> arXiv:2606.03609v2 [cs.RO] 3 Jun 2026

# 1 Introduction 

Consider an embodied agent moving along a city street. At every step, what it can perceive is not the buildings themselves but the space between them: the open, traversable volume its body occupies, shaped by surrounding facades, corners, and passages. This visibility volume — the set of all points visible from a given location — is called an isovist [Benedikt, 1979]. Formalized in architectural theory [Hillier and Hanson, 1984] and spatial cognition [Turner et al., 2001, Wiener and Franz, 2007], isovists have long served to analyse how humans experience and navigate urban space. In three dimensions, an isovist is compactly encoded as a spherical depth map D ∈ RH×W indexed by polar angle θ and azimuth φ, where each cell records the distance to the nearest surface in that direction. Each step of motion produces a new isovist; the sequence of isovists along a path is therefore a natural state representation for a navigating agent — and, we argue, the natural perceptual substrate for an 

embodied world model of the city. Despite this, isovists have never, to our knowledge, been used as the predictive state of a world model. We argue this is a significant gap, and that closing it changes what the model is forced to represent. From the perspective of a robot or autonomous agent navigating a city, the central question is not “what do the buildings look like?” but “what space is available to me, and how will it change if I move?” The isovist answers this directly. It is perception-aligned , encoding exactly the geometry a range sensor measures; it is action-conditioned by construction, since each movement produces a new visibility volume; and it is reconstructive , since isovists accumulated from multiple viewpoints collectively reveal the surrounding building surfaces, with negative space giving rise to positive-space geometry. We refer to this framing as world modelling in negative space (Figure 1). This representational choice is the first thing that distinguishes our work, and it is worth stating precisely what it buys an embodied agent. Appearance-first world models predict future RGB frames [Agarwal et al., 2025, Wan Team, 2025, Wang et al., 2024] and so must carry photometric variation, such as lighting, shadow, and surface colour, that is irrelevant to where an agent can move; geometry is entangled with appearance, and geometric consistency becomes a secondary concern. Bird’s-eye-view occupancy models [Zheng et al., 2024] are geometry-pure but collapse the full three-dimensional structure of the environment onto a flat ground plane, discarding the vertical and above-ground geometry that shapes real navigation, such as overpasses, stacked facades, and multi-level plazas and frontage. The spherical isovist sits between these: it is metric geometry with no photometric channel to entangle, and because it records depth in every direction around the agent rather than a flattened footprint, it preserves the above-ground and multi-level structure a ground-plane grid loses. In this sense the isovist reveals what is otherwise hidden. It exposes the navigable geometry of the space itself, independent of how that space happens to be lit or coloured, which is precisely the structure that supports how embodied agents move through cities, on the ground and above it. Implicit scene representations such as NeRF [Mildenhall et al., 2020] and 3D Gaussian Splatting [Kerbl et al., 2023] reconstruct seen scenes at high fidelity but are scene-specific and not designed for action-conditioned generation across novel trajectories. Our model instead starts from geometry directly: given a sequence of past isovists and a movement action, predict the next isovist, replacing abstract latent features and photometric input with an interpretable, sensor-proximal target. A world model that merely predicts the next frame, however, has no memory of where it has been. When two independently sampled paths cross the same intersection, a frame-only model can predict mutually contradictory geometry at the shared location, because nothing ties the two predictions together. To address this, we augment the predictor with a persistent latent BEV spatial map : an explicit grid of latent features over world coordinates that the model reads from at its current position and writes to after each observation. Because the map is keyed by absolute world position rather than by trajectory, two paths crossing a cell read and write the same memory, providing a mechanism for cross-path geometric consistency. This explicit, writable map is the structural contrast with the closest prior work, Gornet and Thomson’s emergent implicit cognitive map for localization in a small, fixed environment [Gornet and Thomson, 2024]; ours is explicit, persistent, and writable, intended as a generation substrate over real cities (Section 2). Training an autoregressive isovist predictor exposes a familiar failure mode: the teacher-forcing gap. A model trained only on ground-truth context meets its own imperfect predictions at inference, and errors compound over a rollout [Bengio et al., 2015]. The natural fix, corrupting the context during training, has a subtlety specific to our representation: Gaussian-blur corruption of a depth map produces something that is not a valid isovist, because it smooths across the sharp depth discontinuities 2Figure 1: Negative space as the agent’s perceptual world. (a) As an embodied agent moves through a city, what it perceives is not the buildings (positive space) but the open, navigable volume between them (negative space), the visibility volume bounded by surrounding facades. (b) This volume is encoded as a 3D isovist: rays cast from the agent to the nearest surface in every direction yield a spherical visibility-depth map over azimuth φ ∈ [−180 ◦, 180 ◦] and elevation θ ∈ [−30 ◦, 90 ◦], where each cell records distance to the nearest surface (lighter = farther/visible, darker = nearer/occluded). (c) An action-conditioned world model predicts the next isovist from a short history of past isovists and a movement action, and reads from / writes to a persistent latent bird’s-eye-view (BEV) spatial map keyed by world coordinates; independent trajectories crossing a shared cell read and write the same memory, a mechanism for cross-path consistency. Trained city-blind on Manhattan and Paris, the model’s latents carry an emergent cross-city signature (right). at building edges, a pattern that never occurs in real geometry. We instead use self-rollout scheduled sampling : a no-grad forward pass yields the model’s own prediction, and the last context frame is replaced by a convex blend of ground truth and that prediction on a linear curriculum. Because the prediction is itself a valid isovist, the corrupted context stays on the geometry manifold and better approximates the inference-time error distribution. We instantiate these ideas on a reproducible dataset built directly from OpenStreetMap [Haklay and Weber, 2008]. Two morphologically distinct cities (gridded Manhattan and Haussmannian Paris) are turned into ray-cast isovist sequences along intersection-anchored pedestrian paths, so that independently sampled paths share mid-route locations. We then train a single city-blind model (no city label as input) on the combined data. The standout result is emergent: city identity is linearly decodable from the model’s temporal latents at 89 .3% five-fold accuracy, far above raw-pixel and single-frame-statistic probes under an identical protocol. The model has internalized a city-distinctive spatial signature without ever being told which city it is in. This is the same phenomenon Gornet and Thomson [2024] report for emergent implicit maps, observed here at the level of city morphology and on real geometry. We are careful about what this does and does not show: the result rests on two cities, and we disclose a height-provenance confound (Section 5) rather than hide it. Based on the proposed framework, this research makes four contributions. 1. Problem framing. We cast embodied world modelling in negative space . The task is to predict the agent’s 3D isovist, a spherical visibility-depth map, as it moves through a city. We motivate this target as perception-aligned, action-conditioned, and reconstructive. Unlike RGB prediction, it carries no photometric entanglement; unlike flattened occupancy grids, it preserves the above-ground and multi-level geometry that supports navigation. 32. Method. We introduce an action-conditioned autoregressive isovist predictor. It combines a depth-CNN and anchor-frame encoder, an arc-length–indexed Transformer, and a residual depth decoder. We augment it with a persistent latent BEV spatial map (bilinear read, EMA or differentiable write) as a mechanism for cross-path consistency. We train it with self-rollout scheduled sampling, which keeps the corrupted rollout context on the geometry manifold. 3. Empirical headline. We report an emergent cross-city spatial signature . City identity is linearly decodable from a city-blind world model’s latents at 89 .3% ± 3.0% , beating the strongest single-frame baseline (raw pixels, 78 .5% ) by ∼11 points and trivial frame statistics ( 69 .4% ) by ∼20. This is evidence that the signature is not single-frame appearance. 4. Dataset. We release a reproducible OpenStreetMap-based isovist-sequence generator and a publicly released two-city dataset (Manhattan and Paris) under the Open Database License (ODbL), with a documented path to a broader multi-city release. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 situates our work against the isovist and space-syntax literature, embodied world models, emergent spatial maps, and the training and data-provenance practices we build on. Section 3 details the negative-space representation, the dataset-generation pipeline, the model architecture, the persistent BEV spatial map, and the training objective and curriculum. Section 4 presents our experiments: single-step prediction quality against a strong copy-last baseline, the emergent cross-city signature and its baseline ladder, the reconstruction of positive-space geometry, and a preliminary spatial-map consistency ablation. Section 5 discusses what the signature does and does not imply, its relation to emergent cognitive maps, and honest limitations, before Section 6 concludes. 

# 2 Literature Review 

This paper sits at the intersection of two lines of work, organized around two questions an embodied negative-space world model raises. The first concerns what an embodied navigation world model should predict. This positions our negative-space isovist target against appearance-first, occupancy, and reconstruction-based representations, and asks which representation actually reveals the geometry that supports navigation. The second concerns whether predictive training on that target induces spatial structure on its own. This connects our emergent cross-city signature to work on emergent cognitive maps. We treat the isovist literature as the foundation underlying both. 

2.1 Foundation: isovist analysis and space syntax 

The isovist, the set of all points visible from a location, was introduced by Benedikt [1979] to quantify spatial experience in architecture, and became a central tool in the space-syntax program of Hillier and Hanson [1984], which relates the configuration of urban open space to patterns of human movement. A line of subsequent work made the representation progressively more analytic and quantitative. Batty [2001] treated the isovist as a field over space, deriving geometric measures (area, perimeter, compactness, occlusivity) that classify the visual character of a location, while Turner et al. [2001] formalized isovists into visibility graphs, enabling graph-theoretic measures of integration and connectivity across a plan. Morello and Ratti [2009] extended the analysis from the ground plane into three dimensions, computing 3D isovists over voxelized urban form, and a body of behavioural work linked isovist properties to how people perceive, remember, and move through space [Wiener and Franz, 2007, Franz and Wiener, 2008]. What unites this tradition is its stance toward the isovist: it is a descriptive statistic, computed from a fully known plan to characterize a space that already exists and to explain observed behaviour after the fact. We use the same representation but invert this stance, treating the isovist as a predictive state forecast by an embodied agent rather than measured from a known map. We develop this contrast, and our positioning against world models, occupancy, and reconstruction, in the sections below. 

2.2 What to predict: embodied world models and action-conditioned prediction 

Predicting future observations conditioned on actions is a long-standing goal in model-based RL and embodied AI [Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018, Hafner et al., 2020, 2023]. The dominant recent paradigm is appearance-first: large-scale systems generate future RGB video frames directly [Wan Team, 2025, Agarwal et al., 2025], and interactive environments learn controllable latent action 4spaces from video [Bruce et al., 2024]. Because the prediction target is pixels, these models must carry photometric variation such as lighting, shadow, and surface colour. This variation is irrelevant to where an agent can move, and geometric consistency is at best a secondary concern. In autonomous driving, DriveDreamer [Wang et al., 2024] and UniSim [Yang et al., 2023] synthesize future sensor observations conditioned on ego-motion, and GenAD [Yang et al., 2024] scales video prediction to large web-collected driving corpora. All three, however, likewise rely on dense RGB supervision. Bird’s-eye-view occupancy world models [Zheng et al., 2024] move in the geometry-pure direction we favour, forecasting structure rather than appearance. But they collapse the full three-dimensional environment onto a flattened ground-plane grid, discarding the vertical and above-ground geometry that shapes real navigation. Our prediction target sits deliberately between these failure modes: it is metric geometry with no photometric channel to entangle, yet, being a spherical depth map over all viewing directions, it preserves the multi-level and above-ground structure a flattened occupancy grid loses. None of the prior systems model the agent’s full visibility volume as a first-class predictive target, and so none recover the complete navigable geometry, on and above the ground, that an embodied agent actually inhabits. 

2.3 Generation and reconstruction as alternative targets 

Two adjacent families predict geometry for different ends. The first is generative 3D city and scene models, such as CityDreamer [Xie et al., 2024], SceneDreamer [Chen et al., 2023], and Infinite Nature [Liu et al., 2021]. These synthesize unbounded environments optimized for visual plausibility. They generate appearance and coarse geometry that look convincing to a viewer, but not the metric structure an agent could navigate by. The second is implicit reconstruction methods, such as NeRF [Mildenhall et al., 2020], 3D Gaussian Splatting [Kerbl et al., 2023], neural SDFs [Ortiz et al., 2022], and neural SLAM [Zhu et al., 2022]. These recover detailed scenes from posed images at high fidelity but are fundamentally scene-specific. They optimize per-scene parameters and neither generalize to novel environments nor predict across trajectories. Monocular depth estimators [Bochkovskii et al., 2024, Piccinelli et al., 2024] are closest to our representation at the single-frame level but are neither sequential nor action-conditioned. They answer, “what is the depth here?” rather than “how will the visibility volume change if I move?” Our objective is distinct from all three: we predict the metric visibility volume an embodied agent would measure, grounded in real road networks and footprints rather than synthesized for appearance. 

2.4 Emergent structure: cognitive and spatial maps from prediction 

The work most closely related to ours is Gornet and Thomson [2024], who show that a visual predictive-coding network trained to predict the next view in a small, fixed environment develops an emergent, implicit cognitive map whose latents support localization. We share their central premise, that predictive training yields spatially meaningful representations. Our cross-city signature is a real-city instance of the same phenomenon, observed at the level of city morphology rather than within-environment position. We differ on two axes. On memory, their map is emergent and implicit, read out post hoc for localization in a single small Minecraft-style world, whereas ours is an explicit, persistent, writable BEV latent grid keyed by world coordinates and used as a generation substrate to enforce cross-path consistency across real cities. On target, their predictions are over appearance, ours over geometric negative space. More broadly, neuroscience-inspired models report grid-like and place-like codes emerging from navigation objectives in artificial agents [Banino et al., 2018, Cueva and Wei, 2018]; we observe an analogous unsupervised emergence of a city-level code with no localization or city-classification term in the loss. We draw this analogy narrowly, as a shared high-level observation that navigation-prediction objectives induce decodable spatial structure, not as a claim of mechanistic correspondence. Taken together, these lines leave a specific opening: space syntax studies isovists only as descriptive statistics; world models predict appearance or flattened occupancy rather than the visibility volume; and emergent-map work shows prediction induces structure, but on appearance targets in small, fixed worlds. No prior work treats the isovist as the learnable predictive state of an embodied world model over real cities. Our contribution targets the following gaps: 1. The isovist is descriptive, never predictive. In the space-syntax tradition the isovist is a statistic read off a known plan to explain observed movement; it has never been used as the action-conditioned target a navigating agent must forecast without access to the underlying scene. 52. World-model targets entangle appearance or flatten geometry. Appearance-first models carry photometric variation irrelevant to navigation, while bird’s-eye-view occupancy collapses the environment onto a ground plane. Neither recovers the full three-dimensional, above-ground visibility volume an embodied agent actually traverses. 3. Reconstruction methods are scene-specific, not generative across trajectories. NeRF, Gaus-sian splatting, and neural SLAM recover seen scenes at high fidelity but optimize per-scene parameters and cannot predict the visibility volume for novel, unseen paths. 4. Emergent spatial memory is implicit and confined to small fixed worlds. Prior emergent cognitive maps are read out post hoc for localization in a single small environment; there is no explicit, persistent, writable spatial substrate that enforces geometric agreement between independent paths crossing the same place in a real city. 

# 3 Methodology 

3.1 Negative-space representation 

An isovist at observation point p ∈ R3 is a spherical depth map D ∈ RH×W , where each cell (i, j )

records the distance to the nearest scene surface along the ray with polar angle θi and azimuth φj :

D(θ, φ ) = min r > 0 : p + r · d(θ, φ ) ∈ ∂S , (1) where d(θ, φ ) is the unit direction and ∂S is the building-surface boundary. We use H = 64 rows over a polar range covering elevation [−30 ◦, 90 ◦] and W = 128 columns over azimuth φ ∈ [0 , 2π),rotated so φ = 0 aligns with the agent’s walking direction; the representation is thus egocentric and invariant to global heading. Depths are clamped to the observation radius Rmax = 100 m; rays that miss all geometry (sky, open ground) or exceed Rmax are coded as zero. The movement from step t to t+1 is a 5-DoF action vector 

a = 1

> Rmax

h

∆fwd , ∆rgt , ∆up , Rmax  

> π

∆ang , ℓ 

i

∈ R5, (2) where (∆ fwd , ∆rgt , ∆up ) is the displacement in the local egocentric frame, ∆ang is the heading change via atan2 (positive = left turn), and ℓ is the step length. Given a context window of T = 4 historical depth maps and their actions {(Dt, at)}, the model predicts the next isovist ˆDT +1 .

3.2 Dataset generation pipeline 

We construct training data per city via a pipeline that turns an administrative boundary polygon into ray-cast isovist sequences. The same procedure is applied without modification to each city, supporting reproducibility and unbiased cross-city comparison (Figure 3). 

Source data. City boundaries are retrieved from OpenStreetMap via Nominatim. We use Manhattan, New York (the full borough, area ≈ 115 km 2) and Paris, France (arrondissements 1–6, area ≈

15 .5 km 2). The walking road graph is fetched with osmnx and simplified to collapse degree-two nodes while preserving intersection topology ( 36 ,212 nodes for Manhattan, 10 ,957 for Paris). Building footprints are fetched via the OSM building tag, retaining tag metadata for height backfill. 

Height backfill. OSM building heights are unevenly tagged. We assign a height to every build-ing via a deterministic priority: (i) an explicit height tag (parsed to meters with unit detection); (ii) building:levels × 3 m; (iii) the median over K=8 nearest neighbours with an assigned height; (iv) a 10 m global default. We record per-building source attribution. Manhattan reaches 96 .4% direct 

OSM height coverage, with the remainder imputed by neighbour median. Paris reaches only 65 .8% 

direct coverage ( 1.3% tag + 64 .5% levels), with 34 .2% imputed by neighbour median; the 10 m default is never triggered for either city. We disclose the substantial Paris height imputation explicitly, as it bears on the interpretation of the cross-city signature (Section 5). 

Extrusion and intersection-anchored bundles. Footprints are reprojected to local UTM, recentred, and extruded to their backfilled heights into watertight meshes. Crucially, rather than the conventional origin–destination shortest-path sampling (which yields paths that share endpoints but rarely cross 6mid-route), we generate paths around intersection anchors . Per city we select 50 anchor nodes by farthest-first sampling under degree ≥ 4 and minimum pairwise distance 300 m, and at each anchor walk outward along six (incoming, outgoing) neighbour pairs spanning straight traversals and sharp turns, yielding ≈100–200 m paths. Because up to six paths pass through a common anchor, anchor-bundled paths share mid-route BEV cells. This is the property the persistent spatial map exploits and the cross-path consistency experiment measures. 

Ray-cast isovists and preprocessing. At each observation point (sampled every 10 m, observation height 1.6 m) we cast 64 × 128 rays against the extruded building meshes and record the first-hit distance (Eq. 1). Per-frame maps are passed through the preprocessing pipeline (coordinate transform, 

K=32 geometrically salient anchor detection, sparse-to-dense projection, action encoding) and assembled into sliding-window samples with context length 4 and rollout length 3. We split by path identity (not by frame) 8 : 1 : 1 , then concatenate the two cities into a combined dataset of 7,692 train / 

946 validation / 832 test samples (validation: 609 Manhattan, 337 Paris). A per-sample city label is stored for the cross-city probe but is never fed to the model: training is city-blind. 

3.3 Model architecture 

The model follows an encode–aggregate–decode pipeline (Figure 2) with hidden dimension d = 256 

throughout. It has 13 .07 M parameters ( 13 .14 M with the spatial map). 

Frame encoder. Each context frame Dt ∈ R64 ×128 is encoded by two parallel branches. A

depth CNN applies four stride-2 convolutions ( 1 → 32 → 64 → 128 → 256 , each with BatchNorm and ReLU), an adaptive average pool to 4 × 8, a flatten, and a linear map 8192 → 256 (no final activation). An anchor encoder consumes the K=32 geometrically salient anchor points: an anchor MLP ( 3 → 64 → 128 ), a patch MLP ( 24 → 64 → 128 ) over the 8-neighbour patch around each anchor, a fused linear 256 → 256 with ReLU, a max-pool over the K anchors, and a global linear 256 → 256 .The two 256-d features are concatenated and projected by a linear 512 → 256 into the frame token 

ft ∈ R256 .

Temporal model (PathTransformer). The T frame tokens are processed by a custom pre-norm Transformer [Vaswani et al., 2017] with 4 layers, 8 heads, and a GELU feed-forward block 256 →

1024 → 256 . For numerical stability the attention logits are clamped to [−50 , 50] and the softmax is computed in fp32. Critically, positional encoding is not based on integer step indices but on the cumulative arc-length st = 1

> Rmax

P 

> k≤t

ℓk of the trajectory, embedded sinusoidally. This makes the positional signal continuous and invariant to irregular step spacing. For example, 10 m steps yield much smaller inter-frame deltas than 50 m steps, and arc-length encoding represents this faithfully where index encoding cannot. 

Action encoder. The action a ∈ R5 is embedded with Fourier features [Tancik et al., 2020]: a fixed random frequency matrix produces sin / cos features ( → 16 dims), a linear map to 64 , and an MLP (64 → 128 → 256 ) projects to R256 . The action feature is added to every temporal token, conditioning the aggregation on the intended movement. The Transformer output at the final step, z ∈ R256 , is the context summary. 

Residual depth decoder. A linear map 256 → 8192 is reshaped to (256 , 4, 8) and upsampled by four ConvTranspose2d layers (kernel 4, stride 2, 256 → 128 → 64 → 32 → 16 ), followed by a 1 × 1

Conv2d 16 → 1 and a tanh scaled by Rmax , producing a depth-change map δ ∈ [−Rmax , R max ].Rather than predicting the next depth map directly, the model predicts a residual relative to the most recent frame: 

ˆDT +1 = clamp  DT + δ, 0, R max 

. (3) For small ( ∼10 m) steps the isovist changes incrementally: facades visible in DT largely persist, with new surfaces appearing at the field-of-view edges. Predicting δ lets the decoder inherit sharp depth discontinuities at building edges from DT rather than regenerating them, and the tanh gate biases the decoder toward the small changes typical of pedestrian-scale motion ( ∥δ∥ ≪ Rmax ), stabilizing early training [He et al., 2016]. 7Figure 2: Model architecture. Each context frame is encoded by a depth CNN and an anchor MLP ( K=32 anchors, 3-D coordinates) and fused into a 256-d token. An arc-length–indexed PathTransformer (4 layers, 8 heads) aggregates the token sequence. The Fourier-embedded 5-DoF action and the BEV-map read feature are injected into the context summary (the central ⊕). A residual decoder of four ConvTranspose layers produces a depth-change map δ, which is added to the most recent frame DT and clamped (Eq. 3). The persistent BEV spatial map is read at the current world position (bilinear) and written back (EMA / differentiable) after the observation. 

3.4 Persistent latent BEV spatial map 

To give the model geometric memory across paths that traverse the same area, we maintain a 2D bird’s-eye-view feature grid M ∈ RHM ×WM ×d (d=256 ) over world coordinates (x, y ) at cell resolution 

5 m, initialized to zero. 

Read and write. A read at continuous world position (x, y ) returns the bilinear interpolation of the four enclosing cells. A write of feature f distributes f to the four enclosing cells with bilinear weights w, blending into existing content by exponential moving average: 

M [i, j ] ← (1 − αw ij ) M [i, j ] + αw ij f, α = 1 − ρema = 0 .3, (4) with EMA decay ρema = 0 .7; the first write to an empty cell stores the full feature. 

Injection. On each forward pass the read feature s is injected into the temporal summary through a learned projection and a sigmoid gate: 

Fcond = F + σ(g) · Linear (s), (5) where the scalar gate g is initialized to −5 so σ(g) ≈ 0.007 ; the map’s influence ramps up only as its contents become informative during training. 

Differentiable scene-level training. A differentiable write variant produces the new map tensor out-of-place, preserving the autograd graph so gradients flow from a later path’s loss back into the encoder weights of earlier writers in the same scene. Independent paths through a shared region thus read and write the same cells, and a consistency term ties their features together at common locations: 

Lcons = enc (Dt) − M [pos t] 22, (6) producing a symmetric gradient signal that incentivizes mutually consistent geometry where paths cross. 

3.5 Training objective and curriculum Edge-weighted depth loss. Let gij be the normalized Sobel magnitude |Gx| + |Gy | of the ground-truth depth map. We define the pixel edge weight wij = 1 + 3 gij ∈ [1 , 4] , up-weighting pixels near 8Algorithm 1 Self-Rollout Scheduled Sampling (per training step, curriculum weight λ)

Require: Context {Dt}Tt=1 , actions {at}, target DT +1  

> 1:

(no_grad) ˆDT ← fθ

 {Dt}T −1 

> t=1

, aT −1→T

 

> 2:

(mix) ˜DT ← (1 − λ) DT + λ ˆDT 

> 3:

(train) ˆDT +1 ← fθ



{Dt}T −1 

> t=1

∪ { ˜DT }, aT →T +1 

 

> 4:

L ← L depth ( ˆDT +1 , D T +1 ) + 2 .0 Lgrad ( ˆDT +1 , D T +1 ); update θ (AdamW) building edges, and a weighted log-depth error (with ϕ(x) = log(1 + x), i.e. log1p ): 

Ldepth = 1

HW 

X

> i,j

wij ϕ( ˆDij T +1 /R max ) − ϕ(Dij T +1 /R max ) . (7) 

Gradient loss and total. A Sobel-edge consistency term encourages sharp boundaries, and the total loss is 

Lgrad = 1

HW 

X

> i,j

Sobel( ˆDT +1 )ij − Sobel( DT +1 )ij , L = Ldepth + 2 .0 Lgrad . (8) For multi-step rollout (up to K = 3 steps) the per-step losses are weighted by 1/(1 + 0 .5k). We optimize with AdamW [Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019] (learning rate 10 −4, weight decay 0.01 ), a 

2000 -step warmup then cosine decay, gradient clipping at 1.0, and fp16 mixed precision. 

Self-rollout scheduled sampling. At each step we first run a no-grad forward pass to obtain the model’s own prediction ˆDT , then replace the last context frame with the convex blend 

˜DT = (1 − λ) DT + λ ˆDT , (9) with λ ramping linearly 0 → 0.7 over training (Algorithm 1). Because ˆDT is itself a valid isovist, 

˜DT stays on or near the geometry manifold, unlike Gaussian-blur corruption, which smooths across the sharp depth discontinuities that real isovists always exhibit and therefore misrepresents the inference-time error distribution. 

# 4 Experiment 

We evaluate three questions. (1) How accurate is single-step isovist prediction against a strong baseline? (2) Does a city-blind world model develop a decodable cross-city spatial signature, and is it explained by single-frame appearance? (3) Does the persistent spatial map improve cross-path geometric consistency? Single-step numbers are from the best checkpoint of a 400-epoch run; the signature and consistency analyses are post-hoc and do not depend on that run. The two cities under study are shown in Figure 3. 

4.1 Single-step prediction quality 

We compare against copy-last , the zero-parameter predictor ˆDT +1 = DT . At 10 m steps the isovist changes little between consecutive frames, so copy-last is a strong baseline; beating it on every metric requires the model to improve precisely on the small, structured changes at the field-of-view edges, which is the hardest part of the problem. We report MAE, RMSE, SSIM, and building-edge F1 on the n=832 test samples (Table 1) and show qualitative context/prediction/ground-truth/error panels in Figure 4. Our model improves over copy-last on MAE ( 3.57 vs. 4.36 m), RMSE ( 11 .34 

vs. 13 .80 m), and edge-F1 ( 0.719 vs. 0.689 ), and matches it on SSIM ( 0.852 vs. 0.856 ): it learns the small, structured inter-frame changes at the field-of-view edges that copy-last cannot. Multi-step rollout results, where the model continues to beat copy-last at every horizon, are reported in Appendix A.1 (Figure 7, Table A1). The empirical centrepiece of the paper nonetheless remains the cross-city signature rather than single-step state of the art. 9Figure 3: Two morphologically distinct cities. Walking road networks of Manhattan (gridded, 

36 ,212 nodes, ≈115 km 2) and Paris arrondissements 1–6 (Haussmannian, 10 ,957 nodes, ≈15.5 km 2), both derived from OpenStreetMap. The two panels are not drawn to a common scale. The contrast in street geometry is the morphological basis of the cross-city signature. Table 1: Single-step isovist prediction quality on the combined test set ( n=832 ). MAE/RMSE in meters (relative to Rmax = 100 m); higher SSIM and Edge-F1 is better. Copy-last is a strong baseline because the isovist changes little over a 10 m step; our model (best checkpoint of a 400-epoch run) improves on it on every metric except SSIM, where the two are tied.             

> Method MAE (m) ↓RMSE (m) ↓SSIM ↑Edge-F1 ↑
> Copy-last (zero-parameter) 4.36 13 .80 0.856 0.689
> Ours (negative-space world model) 3.57 11.34 0.852 0.719

Figure 4: Qualitative single-step prediction. For four test samples we show (left to right) the four context isovists, the predicted next isovist, the ground truth, and the per-pixel absolute error. Depth in meters (viridis); error in meters (hot). Residual prediction preserves the sharp building edges inherited from the last context frame; errors concentrate at newly visible surfaces near the field-of-view edges. 10 Figure 5: Emergent cross-city spatial signature. (a) City-classification accuracy (five-fold CV) for a ladder of probes under an identical protocol. The city-blind world model’s PathTransformer latent decodes the source city far above raw pixels, per-frame statistics, the majority class, and shuffled chance. A probe that beats single-frame baselines is reading structure absent from any single frame’s appearance, in how the temporal model integrates the sequence and the action. (b) t-SNE of the latents coloured by city; Manhattan and Paris occupy largely separable regions. (c) Training convergence: train and validation loss over the 400-epoch run, with validation loss plateauing early. We also verify that city-blind training does not collapse onto one city: mean validation loss is 0.184 

for Manhattan versus 0.290 for Paris, a ratio of 1.58 × < 2×. This margin supports the city-blind formulation; had one city’s loss exceeded the other’s by more than 2×, an explicit city-conditioned variant would have been warranted. 

4.2 The emergent cross-city spatial signature 

This is the paper’s headline result. We test whether the single city-blind model has internalized city-distinctive structure by probing its latents. For every validation sample we extract the 256 -d PathTransformer output at the last context frame and train an L2-regularized logistic regression to classify the source city (Manhattan vs. Paris), reporting mean accuracy over stratified five-fold cross-validation ( n=946 ; 609 Manhattan, 337 Paris). To establish what the signature is not , we run the identical probe protocol on a ladder of baselines (Table 2, Figure 5): the majority class; shuffled labels (chance); single-frame global isovist statistics; the same statistics over all four context frames; and the raw, 8 × 16 -pooled pixels of the last frame. Table 2: Cross-city signature baseline ladder (five-fold CV, n=946 : 609 Manhattan / 337 Paris). All rows use the identical probe protocol. The world-model temporal latent (bold) beats the strongest single-frame baseline (raw pixels) by ∼11 points and trivial frame statistics by ∼20, so the signature is not explained by single-frame appearance.                   

> Probe input Accuracy (%) Majority class 64 .4
> Shuffled labels (chance) 53 .8
> Single-frame global statistics 69 .4±2.7
> Global statistics over 4 context frames 70 .7±3.3
> Raw 8×16 -pooled pixels (last frame) 78 .5±1.7
> World-model PathTransformer latent (256-d) 89 .3±3.0

The world-model latent reaches 89 .3% ± 3.0% , exceeding the strongest single-frame baseline (raw pooled pixels, 78 .5% ) by roughly 11 points and the single-frame statistics by roughly 20 . The crucial comparison is against raw pixels and per-frame statistics: a probe that beats these is reading structure that is not present in any single frame’s appearance. It lives in how the temporal model integrates 11 Figure 6: Negative space gives rise to positive-space geometry. Accumulating the world model’s predicted isovists along a single path produces a continuous negative-space volume (a). Sampling its surface as points and wireframe (b), then colouring those points by local density (c), makes the bounding building facades emerge as high-density ridges (warmer = higher density, i.e. more consistently reconstructed surface; green = sparse open volume). The bottom row shows density-coloured detail views at three points along the path: the path start (d), a straight corridor (e), and an angled junction (f), where the facades recovered purely from accumulated visibility are clearest. This is the reconstructive property of the representation: the open volume an agent traverses, accumulated over a trajectory, recovers the positive-space surfaces that bound it. the sequence and the action. The signature is therefore a property of the learned dynamics, not a trivially decodable surface feature. We emphasize the probe uses a single city-blind model with no 

city conditioning at any point in training. Training convergence is shown in Figure 5(c): validation loss plateaus early (by roughly epoch 30) while training loss continues to decrease, and we report results from the best validation checkpoint. Per-epoch qualitative evolution is shown in Appendix A.2. Finally, the negative-space representation is reconstructive: accumulating predicted isovists along a path recovers the positive-space surfaces that bound the open volume. Figure 6 illustrates this reconstructive property. As predicted isovists accumulate along a path, their surface points trace out the surrounding building facades, which appear as high-density ridges when the points are coloured by local density. 

4.3 Spatial-map consistency ablation (preliminary) 

Finally, we test whether the persistent spatial map improves cross-path geometric consistency. We 

stress that this is a preliminary proof-of-concept : it uses a single synthetic four-way grid intersection with only n=4 crossing pairs and is not a validated consistency claim. We turn the persistent map ON vs. OFF and measure agreement between the two crossing paths’ accumulated point clouds inside the intersection region (Table 3, Figure 7). With the map on, all four metrics improve: voxel IoU 0.011 → 0.021 (+91% ), symmetric Chamfer 

21 .1 → 13 .5 m ( −36% ), F-score@1m 0.090 → 0.144 (+60% ), and F-score@3m 0.152 → 0.240 

(+58% ). We read this as encouraging evidence that an explicit, writable BEV memory can reconcile geometry where paths cross. But with only four synthetic pairs it is a proof-of-concept, not a validated result. Establishing cross-path consistency on real Manhattan and Paris intersections at scale, enabled by the released pipeline, is future work. 12 Table 3: Spatial-map ON/OFF intersection consistency — preliminary proof-of-concept on a synthetic four-way grid intersection, n=4 crossing pairs. Higher IoU/F-score and lower Chamfer is better. The map improves all four metrics; this is a directional signal, not a validated claim.                 

> Configuration Voxel IoU ↑Chamfer (m) ↓F-score@1m ↑F-score@3m ↑
> Spatial map OFF 0.011 21 .10.090 0.152
> Spatial map ON 0.021 13 .50.144 0.240
> Relative change +91% −36% +60% +58%

Figure 7: Multi-step rollout and spatial-map consistency. (a) Prediction quality vs. rollout horizon for the world model and copy-last: the model beats copy-last on MAE and Edge-F1 at every horizon and tracks it on SSIM, with error growing gracefully rather than diverging. (b) Spatial-map ablation (preliminary, synthetic): cross-path intersection consistency with the persistent BEV map ON vs. OFF on a synthetic four-way crossing ( n=4 pairs). The map improves all four metrics, but the large error bars at n=4 make this a directional proof-of-concept, not a validated result; real-city evaluation is future work. 

# 5 Discussion 

5.1 What the cross-city signature implies, and what it does not 

A city-blind model that never receives a city label nonetheless encodes city identity in its temporal latents at 89 .3% , well above what any single frame’s appearance supports (raw pixels, 78 .5% ; frame statistics, 69 .4% ). The gap between the temporal-latent probe and the single-frame probes is the load-bearing comparison: it localizes the signature in the dynamics the model learns, how the visibility volume evolves as the agent moves, rather than in static appearance. Manhattan’s regular grid and Paris’s radial Haussmann blocks induce systematically different isovist sequences (long straight corridors with abrupt intersection openings versus oblique sightlines and angled junctions), and the model’s latents separate along that axis. This is the hidden geometry made legible: the model has recovered, from movement alone, the morphological structure that space syntax has long had to compute from a known plan. We want to be precise about the strength of the claim, though. 89 .3% is linear decodability on a binary problem, which establishes that a city-distinctive axis exists in the representation, not that the model has built an explicit map, performed localization, or “understood” morphology in any richer sense. The honest reading is that predictive training on negative space yields representations from which coarse urban structure is recoverable, unprompted; the richer interpretations are hypotheses the present experiment does not test. 13 5.2 Relation to emergent cognitive maps 

This phenomenon sits in a clear lineage. Gornet and Thomson [2024] show that a visual predictive-coding network trained to predict the next view in a small, fixed environment develops an emergent, implicit cognitive map whose latents support localization. Our cross-city signature is a real-city instance of the same premise, that predictive training yields spatially meaningful representations, observed at the coarser level of city morphology rather than within-environment position. The connection to neuroscience-inspired models is by analogy and should be read as such: grid-like and place-like codes emerge in artificial agents trained on navigation objectives [Banino et al., 2018, Cueva and Wei, 2018], and we observe an analogous unsupervised emergence of a city-level code without any localization or city-classification objective in the loss. We draw this analogy deliberately narrowly. We do not claim a grid-cell mechanism, a metric place code, or any correspondence to neural representation beyond the shared high-level observation that a navigation-prediction objective is sufficient to induce decodable spatial structure. The two architectural differences from Gornet and Thomson remain the substantive ones: our spatial map is explicit, persistent, and writable rather than implicit and read out post hoc, and our prediction target is geometric negative space rather than appearance. 

5.3 What the negative-space representation reveals 

It is worth stating plainly what this paper does and does not reveal, since that is its central claim. Across both single-step prediction and the emergent signature, the common thread is that negative space exposes geometry that appearance hides. A 64 × 128 spherical isovist carries no lighting, shadow, or colour, only the metric distance to surrounding surface in every direction, so what the model learns to predict is, by construction, the navigable shape of the space rather than its photometric skin. Two consequences follow. First, at the level of a single step, the structure the model must get right is the field-of-view geometry where new surfaces appear and old ones occlude. This is why it improves over copy-last precisely on edge-F1, the most geometry-sensitive metric. Second, at the level of a whole trajectory, the accumulated visibility volume recovers the positive-space surfaces that bound it, and the way that volume evolves under movement differs systematically between a grid and a radial plan. This is what the city-blind probe reads out. In both cases the model is recovering the hidden, navigable geometry that supports how an embodied agent moves on the ground and through above-ground form. This is the structure space syntax has historically had to compute from a known plan, here learned from movement alone. 

5.4 Why residual prediction and self-rollout SS help 

For ∼10 m steps the dominant signal between consecutive isovists is shared: the same facades, shifted slightly in azimuth. Residual prediction turns the task into a sparse update concentrated on genuinely changing regions, letting the decoder inherit sharp boundaries rather than re-synthesize them. This is why we beat copy-last precisely on edge-F1, the metric most sensitive to the small structured changes at the field-of-view edges. Self-rollout corruption, unlike Gaussian blur, produces the very error types the model meets at inference, such as small metric offsets on flat surfaces and occasional mis-predictions in partially occluded regions, because the corruption is the model’s own valid isovist and so lies on the geometry manifold rather than off it. 

5.5 Limitations and future work 

Several constraints bound our claims. (1) Two cities. The signature is demonstrated on two morpho-logically distinct cities (grid vs. Haussmann); a third, morphologically distinct city is the obvious next step and is enabled by the released pipeline. (2) Binary decodability. 89 .3% is linear separability on a two-class problem; it establishes a decodable axis, not an explicit or metric map. (3) Single-step scope. Our 400-epoch model beats copy-last on MAE/RMSE/edge-F1 and matches it on SSIM, but we do not claim single-step SOTA against external depth-prediction methods, which target a different, RGB-conditioned setting. (4) Consistency is preliminary. The spatial-map ablation uses one synthetic intersection with n=4 pairs and is explicitly not a validated consistency result; a real-city, multi-intersection evaluation is future work. (5) Lossy representation. A 64 × 128 depth map captures only the nearest surface per direction, so a single isovist is a single-layer spherical shell; multi-frame fusion only partially compensates. (6) Height provenance. 34 .2% of Paris heights are 14 neighbour-median imputed; some of the cross-city signature could reflect this provenance difference rather than pure morphology, a confound we disclose rather than hide. (7) Static, synthetic geometry. 

Dynamic objects and the sim-to-real gap to real range sensors remain unaddressed. The released pipeline scales the signature study to many cities and supports a proper multi-city consistency evaluation; with three or more morphologically distinct cities the binary-decodability limitation becomes a multi-class one, and morphology becomes a learnable axis rather than a single separating hyperplane. Real LiDAR spherical range images are a direct drop-in for ray-cast isovists, and appearance or semantics can be added as extra channels of the spherical representation without changing the predictive architecture. This turns the photometric variation we currently exclude into optional conditioning rather than entangled input. 

# 6 Conclusion 

We introduced a world model that operates in negative space . It predicts the agent’s 3D isovist, the spherical visibility volume between buildings, from a short history and a movement action, using residual depth prediction to inherit sharp building edges and self-rollout scheduled sampling to close the teacher-forcing gap on the geometry manifold. To enforce cross-path consistency we equipped the model with a persistent, explicit, writable BEV latent spatial map. Our central empirical finding is that a single city-blind model trained on Manhattan and Paris develops an emergent cross-city spatial signature: city identity is linearly decodable from its temporal latents at 89 .3% , beating raw-pixel and single-frame-statistic probes and thereby ruling out single-frame appearance as the explanation. Our predictor improves over a strong copy-last baseline on MAE, RMSE, and edge sharpness (matching it on SSIM), we give a preliminary proof-of-concept that the spatial map improves intersection consistency, and we release a reproducible two-city OpenStreetMap isovist dataset and pipeline. We do not overclaim: the signature rests on two cities, and the consistency result is synthetic and preliminary. What we do claim is that negative-space world modelling is a lightweight, interpretable, and reproducible foundation for urban spatial reasoning, one that gives rise, unprompted, to structure that knows which city it is walking through. 

# Data and Code Availability 

We release a reproducible isovist-sequence dataset for Manhattan and Paris. All source geometry derives from OpenStreetMap [Haklay and Weber, 2008, OpenStreetMap contributors, 2024]; accord-ingly, the dataset is distributed under the Open Database License (ODbL) . We provide a datasheet following Gebru et al. [2021], including per-city height-provenance tables that disclose the substantial Paris height imputation. The dataset will be archived on Zenodo under ODbL. The full generation pipeline and model code will be released publicly upon acceptance. 

# References 

Niket Agarwal, Ahmed Ali, Maciej Bala, Yogesh Balaji, Erik Barker, Tiffany Cai, et al. Cosmos world foundation models for physical AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12599 , 2025. Andrea Banino, Caswell Barry, Benigno Uria, Charles Blundell, Timothy Lillicrap, Piotr Mirowski, Alexander Pritzel, Martin J. Chadwick, Thomas Degris, Joseph Modayil, et al. Vector-based navigation using grid-like representations in artificial agents. Nature , 557(7705):429–433, 2018. Michael Batty. Exploring isovist fields: Space and shape in architectural and urban morphology. 

Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design , 28(1):123–150, 2001. doi: 10.1068/b2725. Michael L. Benedikt. To take hold of space: isovists and isovist fields. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design , 6(1):47–65, 1979. Samy Bengio, Oriol Vinyals, Navdeep Jaitly, and Noam Shazeer. Scheduled sampling for sequence prediction with recurrent neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 28, 2015. Aleksei Bochkovskii, Amaël Delaunoy, Hugo Germain, Marcel Santos, Yichao Zhou, Stephan R. Richter, and Vladlen Koltun. Depth pro: Sharp monocular metric depth in less than a second. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02073 , 2024. 15 Jake Bruce, Michael D. Dennis, Ashley Edwards, Jack Parker-Holder, Yuge Shi, Edward Hughes, Matthew Lai, Aditi Mavalankar, Richie Steigerwald, Chris Apps, et al. Genie: Generative interactive environments. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2024. Zhaoxi Chen, Guangcong Wang, and Ziwei Liu. SceneDreamer: Unbounded 3D scene generation from 2D image collections. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI) , 2023. Christopher J. Cueva and Xue-Xin Wei. Emergence of grid-like representations by training recur-rent neural networks to perform spatial localization. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2018. Gerald Franz and Jan M. Wiener. From space syntax to space semantics: a behaviorally and perceptually oriented methodology for the efficient description of the geometry and topology of environments. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design , 35(4):574–592, 2008. Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach, Hal Daumé III, and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for datasets. Communications of the ACM , 64(12): 86–92, 2021. James Gornet and Matt Thomson. Automated construction of cognitive maps with visual predictive coding. Nature Machine Intelligence , 6:820–833, 2024. doi: 10.1038/s42256-024-00863-1. David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122 , 2018. Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent imagination. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,2020. Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains through world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104 , 2023. Mordechai Haklay and Patrick Weber. OpenStreetMap: User-generated street maps. IEEE Pervasive Computing , 7(4):12–18, 2008. doi: 10.1109/MPRV.2008.80. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 770–778, 2016. Bill Hillier and Julienne Hanson. The Social Logic of Space . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1984. Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3D gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 42(4):139:1–139:14, 2023. Andrew Liu, Richard Tucker, Varun Jampani, Ameesh Makadia, Noah Snavely, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Infinite nature: Perpetual view generation of natural scenes from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2021. Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2019. Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. NeRF: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , pages 405–421, 2020. Eugenio Morello and Carlo Ratti. A digital image of the city: 3D isovists in Lynch’s urban analysis. 

Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design , 36(5):837–853, 2009. doi: 10.1068/b34144t. OpenStreetMap contributors. OpenStreetMap. https://www.openstreetmap.org , 2024. Data available under the Open Database License (ODbL). Joseph Ortiz, Alexander Clegg, Jing Dong, Edgar Sucar, Derek Nowrouzezahrai, Conor Sherrill, and Mustafa Mukadam. iSDF: Real-time neural signed distance fields for robot perception. In 

Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2022. 16 Luigi Piccinelli, Yung-Hsu Yang, Christos Sakaridis, Mattia Segu, Siyuan Li, Luc Van Gool, and Fisher Yu. UniDepth: Universal monocular metric depth estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. Matthew Tancik, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Sara Fridovich-Keil, Nithin Raghavan, Utkarsh Singhal, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ren Ng. Fourier features let networks learn high frequency functions in low dimensional domains. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 33, 2020. Alasdair Turner, Maria Doxa, David O’Sullivan, and Alan Penn. From isovists to visibility graphs: a methodology for the analysis of architectural space. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design , 28(1):103–121, 2001. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 30, 2017. Wan Team. Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20314 , 2025. Xiaofeng Wang, Zheng Zhu, Guan Huang, Xinze Chen, and Jiwen Lu. DriveDreamer: Towards real-world-driven world models for autonomous driving. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2024. Jan M. Wiener and Gerald Franz. The isovist concept — its relevance to spatial cognition and spatial behavior. Spatial Cognition V: Reasoning, Action, Interaction , pages 208–227, 2007. Haozhe Xie, Zhaoxi Chen, Fangzhou Hong, and Ziwei Liu. CityDreamer: Compositional generative model of unbounded 3D cities. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024. Jiazhi Yang, Shenyuan Guo, et al. Generalized predictive model for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09630 , 2024. TODO: confirm this is the correct paper for “LAW” in outline. Ze Yang, Yun Chen, Jingkang Wang, Sivabalan Hu, Ze Li, Adrien Gaidon, and Raquel Urtasun. UniSim: A neural closed-loop sensor simulator. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2023. Wenzhao Zheng, Weiliang Chen, Yuanhui Huang, Borui Zhang, Yueqi Duan, and Jiwen Lu. OccWorld: Learning a 3D occupancy world model for autonomous driving. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2024. Zihan Zhu, Songyou Peng, Viktor Larsson, Weiwei Xu, Hujun Bao, Zhaopeng Cui, Martin R. Oswald, and Marc Pollefeys. NICE-SLAM: Neural implicit scalable encoding for SLAM. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022. 17 A Additional experimental results 

A.1 Multi-step autoregressive rollout 

Beyond the single-step results of Section 4.1, we evaluate the world model under autoregressive rollout, feeding its own predictions back as context. We report prediction quality at horizons of 1, 2, and 3 steps (10 m each) in Table A1, and visualize the corresponding trends in Figure 7(a). The world model beats copy-last on MAE, RMSE, and Edge-F1 at every horizon and tracks it on SSIM. Error grows gracefully rather than diverging, consistent with the self-rollout scheduled-sampling training. Table A1: Multi-step rollout metrics (combined test set). MAE/RMSE in meters; higher SSIM and Edge-F1 is better. World model vs. copy-last at each horizon.                 

> Horizon MAE (m) model/copy RMSE (m) model/copy SSIM model/copy Edge-F1 model/copy 1 (10 m) 3.57 /4.36 11 .34 /13 .80 0.852 /0.856 0.719 /0.689
> 2 (20 m) 5.13 /6.24 14 .40 /17 .45 0.812 /0.810 0.651 /0.605
> 3 (30 m) 6.46 /7.60 16 .78 /19 .72 0.781 /0.782 0.608 /0.564

A.2 Training dynamics 

We characterize training along two complementary axes. Figure A1 shows convergence over the full 400-epoch run: validation loss plateaus early, by roughly epoch 30, while training loss continues to decrease, and we report results from the best validation checkpoint (epoch 394). Figure A2 then shows how single-step prediction improves visually over the same run, with the same sample predicted at epochs 1, 25, 50, 75, and 100. Early predictions miss the emerging surface (large bright error); by roughly epoch 50 the model recovers sharp building edges and the error collapses to a thin contour at the field-of-view boundary, consistent with the early plateau in validation loss. 

Figure A1: Training convergence. Train and validation loss over 400 epochs; validation loss plateaus early while training loss keeps decreasing, with the best validation checkpoint marked. 18 Figure A2: Per-epoch evolution of single-step prediction. The same sample predicted at epochs 1, 25, 50, 75, and 100. The error contracts to a thin edge contour as training proceeds. 

# B Interactive viewer 

We release a browser-based interactive viewer that lets a user drive the world model with keyboard actions. After loading a path, each arrow-key action generates the next isovist autoregressively, and the predicted negative-space hemisphere and its 64 × 128 depth map update in real time (Figure A3). The viewer is intended as a qualitative demonstration of action-conditioned generation and is included with the released code. 

Figure A3: Interactive isovist rollout. A browser-based viewer drives the world model with keyboard actions. After loading a path (1), each arrow-key action generates the next isovist autoregressively: forward → Step 1 (2), turn right → Step 2 (3), forward → Step 3 (4). Each panel shows the predicted negative-space hemisphere (left) and its 64 × 128 depth map (right); mean depth is annotated per step. 19