Title: Real2Sim: A Physics-driven and Editable Gaussian Splatting Framework for Autonomous Driving Scenes

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13591v1

Published Time: Thu, 14 May 2026 01:22:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Real2Sim: A Physics-driven and Editable Gaussian Splatting Framework for Autonomous Driving Scenes 

Kaicong Huang 1, Talha Azfar 1, Weisong Shi 2, Ruimin Ke 1⋆

Abstract — Reliable autonomous driving relies on large-scale, well-labeled data and robust models. However, manual data collection is resource-intensive, and traditional simulation suf-fers from a persistent reality gap. While recent generative frameworks and radiance-field methods improve visual fidelity, they still struggle with temporal and spatial consistency and cannot ensure physics-aware behavior, limiting their applicabil-ity to driving scenario generation. To address these challenges, we propose Real2Sim, an unified framework that combines 4D Gaussian Splatting (4DGS) with a differentiable Material Point Method (MPM) solver. Real2Sim explicitly reconstructs dynamic driving scenes as temporally continuous Gaussian primitives, supports instance-level editing, and simulates re-alistic object-object and object-environment interactions. This framework enables physics-aware, high-fidelity synthesis of diverse, editable scenarios, including challenging corner cases such as collisions and post-impact trajectories. Experiments on the Waymo Open Dataset validate Real2Sim’s capabilities in rendering, reconstruction, editing, and physics simulation, demonstrating its potential as a scalable tool for data generation in downstream tasks such as perception, tracking, trajectory prediction, and end-to-end policy learning. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Reliable autonomous driving systems hinge on two pillars: powerful, robust models and large-scale, well-labeled data. Recent foundation driving models report performance gains when trained on millions of time-synchronized images or video frames with dense 2D/3D labels [1], an effort that can require tens of thousands of staff-hours using conventional manual pipelines. To ease this burden, researchers have turned to data-generating simulators and generative models. Methods such as SurfelGAN [2] synthesize camera and LiDAR signals directly from limited drives, and the most recent work, GAIA-2 [3], realizes multi-view generation and multi-agent interactions through a diffusion world model. Such works shrink the gap between real and synthetic sensors, yet they still suffer from rendering artifacts and a noticeable domain gap when models trained in simulation are deployed in the real world. And aligning multi-view outputs and keeping geometry consistent over time remain open challenges. In recent years, Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [4] pushed high-fidelity image generation forward, but their volumet-ric field evaluation is too slow for closed-loop simulation. The advent of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [5] achieves  

> 1

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Rensse-laer Polytechnic Institute, 110 Eighth Street, Troy, NY USA 12180. 

huangk10@rpi.edu, azfart@rpi.edu, ker@rpi.edu  

> 2

Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE USA 19716. weisong@udel.edu  

> ⋆

Corresponding author. t=0 

Generative methods    

> t=1 t=2 t=3
> Spatio-temporal consistency physics realism

Simulation methods    

> t=0 t=1 t=2 t=3
> Sim-to-Real Gap

Real2Sim (Ours)    

> Real Driving Data Editable Gaussian Scene
> MPM Solver
> Physics-aware interaction
> High-fidelity Physics-aware Free editing

Fig. 1. Comparison of scene generation paradigms for autonomous driving. Generative methods often lack spatio-temporal consistency and physical realism, while conventional simulation methods suffer from a sim-to-real gap. Real2Sim bridges these limitations by integrating Gaussian Splatting with differentiable physics solver. 

comparable quality while enabling real-time rendering of whole street blocks on commodity GPUs, making it attractive for robotics and autonomous driving research. Building on this, 4D Gaussian Splatting (4DGS) [6], [7], [8], [9] extend the representation with temporal deformation, supporting continuous novel-time, novel-view synthesis for complex scenes with moving vehicles and pedestrians. Nevertheless, existing 4DGS pipelines record what the sensors saw and edit the current Gaussian primitives naively (position, orientation, mesh replacement). They cannot sim-ulate what could happen in the future under the simulation settings. In particular, they lack physics-aware behavior, so edited objects do not react plausibly to forces or collisions. These capabilities are indispensable for testing corner cases such as multi-car crashes or near-misses in safety-critical  

> arXiv:2605.13591v1 [cs.CV] 13 May 2026 LiDAR Data
> Multi-view Images
> 4DGS
> Objects
> Background
> Switch, Translate, Rotate, …
> Scene Editing
> Rendering
> MPM Solver
> Physical Trajectory
> Physics Simulation
> Collision, Fall, …
> Detection
> Prediction
> End-to-end model
> Downstream Fig. 2. Framework of Real2Sim. Real2Sim first reconstructs separate Gaussian-based representations of the static background and each dynamic object from multi-modal input data. Each object is encoded as an independent Gaussian cluster, enabling high-degree-of-freedom editing to create diverse traffic scenarios. To impart physical behavior, a lightweight physics engine is introduced, treating each Gaussian as a particle whose state is updated by the MPM solver. The resulting synthetic data can support downstream tasks such as detection, tracking, motion prediction, and end-to-end driving model training.

domains. Recent efforts to embed kinematics and dynamics into Gaussian primitives [10], [11], [12] demonstrate feasi-bility but have not yet been explored in street-wide driving sequences. To enable a high-fidelity, editable, and physically embed-ded framework for autonomous driving simulation and scene generation, we introduce Real2Sim, a system that unifies 4D Gaussian Splatting with a differentiable physics solver to turn real-world driving scenes into editable, physics-aware simulations, as shown in Fig. 1. Real2Sim first recon-structs a continuous 4D Gaussian representation of each scene clip, capturing appearance and motion over the entire time window. It then assigns every Gaussian cluster to an object instance so that users can reposition, rotate, scale, or even replace vehicles, pedestrians, and static assets on the fly. Each object carries mass, friction, and restitution parameters, and by integrating these properties with a Ma-terial Point Method (MPM) solver, the system updates all Gaussians physically and reproduces realistic object-object and object-environment interactions, including collisions and post-impact trajectories. Such editing with high degree of freedom combined with physical simulation not only benefits the generation of diverse driving scenarios but also addresses the lack of corner case data in autonomous driving datasets, which often results in long-tailed training distributions [13]. We test Real2Sim on the Waymo Open Dataset [1] and demonstrate dynamic reconstruction, instance-level editing, and physical simulation to support abundant and diverse training data for tasks such as object detection, multi-object tracking, trajectory prediction, and end-to-end driving policy learning. The main contributions of this work could be summarized as follows:  

> •

We propose Real2Sim, a simulation framework for autonomous driving based on Gaussian Splatting that delivers high-fidelity, physics-aware scene generation and supports arbitrary in-scene editing, enabling the creation of diverse, real-world traffic scenarios.  

> •

Real2Sim allows users to customize the physical properties of every object and faithfully simulates object-to-object and object-to-environment interactions, increasing the flexibility and realism of synthesized traffic scenes.  

> •

Real2Sim supports the creation of corner cases and large-scale synthetic datasets that benefit downstream tasks such as detection, tracking, motion prediction, and end-to-end driving. II. R ELATED WORKS 

A. 3D Vision for Scene Reconstruction and Autonomous Driving 

3D vision can accurately reconstruct the spatial relation-ships of objects in the physical world, and has therefore attracted widespread attention in autonomous driving and robotics. Early reconstruction methods relied primarily on multi-view stereo (MVS) and structure-from-motion (SfM) to recover dense point clouds from multiple calibrated cam-eras. A representative method, COLMAP, generates high-quality geometry through offline optimization over large image collections. However, it is computationally intensive and performs poorly on dynamic objects [14]. With the advent of deep learning, point-based and voxel-based networks have been widely applied to construct 3D structure directly from images or LiDAR scans [15], [16], [17]. More recently, neural implicit representations such as NeRF encode a scene as a continuous volumetric function and use a small MLP to synthesize high-fidelity novel views [4]. Subsequent work has focused on integrating various downstream tasks and accelerating rendering [18], [19]. Although these methods deliver excellent visual quality, they require dense per-scene optimization, making them imprac-tical for real-time autonomous driving applications [20]. Gaussian Splatting instead replaces implicit voxels with explicit Gaussian kernels [5], enabling real-time scene edit-ing and demonstrating exceptional performance in both indoor and urban outdoor reconstruction. This approach supports diverse data generation for downstream tasks such as detection, segmentation, tracking, prediction, and end-to-end autonomous driving models [21]. The emergence of 4D Gaussian representations, which directly model dynamic objects and scenes, makes them particularly well-suited for motion-rich driving environments [6], [7], [8], [9]. In the autonomous driving domain, large-scale multimodal datasets such as the Waymo Open Dataset [1] and nuScenes [22] provide extensive sequences for perception and map-ping research. Simulation platforms like CARLA [23] have become essential for testing perception and planning algo-rithms. However, according to the scaling laws of large-model training, vast amounts of data remain critical for all major autonomous-driving developers. Collecting real-world data is both time-consuming and costly, and conven-tional simulations frequently exhibit a notable reality gap. Gaussian Splatting overcomes these limitations by enabling efficient, laboratory-scale data editing and synthesis. When paired with real-time, physics-based scene simulation, it not only delivers accurate rendering and reconstruction but also supports dynamic, in-scene interactions. This unified platform streamlines both simulation and data generation for downstream tasks such as detection, tracking, motion prediction, and end-to-end driving model training. Building on these insights, we introduce Real2Sim: a comprehensive autonomous-driving simulation platform that combines Gaussian Splatting’s high-fidelity rendering and interactive scene editing with Gaussian-level physics sim-ulation, delivering rich, versatile data for downstream tasks. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

We propose Real2Sim, a framework that integrates Gaus-sian Splatting with an MPM solver to generate and edit real-world driving scenes with physics awareness, as shown in Fig. 2. Real2Sim first reconstructs separate Gaussian-based representations of the static background and each dy-namic object in a video sequence (Section 3.B). Each object is encoded as an independent Gaussian cluster, allowing users to reposition or rotate vehicles or to insert external 3D assets to diversify traffic scenarios. To impart physical behavior, Real2Sim incorporates a lightweight physics en-gine that treats each Gaussian as a particle whose state is updated by the MPM solver (Section 3.C). This approach faithfully reproduces object-object and object-environment interactions, including collisions and subsequent trajectories. The remainder of this section first reviews the fundamentals of 3D Gaussian Splatting and then describes Real2Sim’s core modules in detail. 

A. 3D Gaussian Splatting 

3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [5] represents a static scene as an explicit collection of anisotropic Gaussian kernels, each parameterized by a center position, covariance, opacity, and spherical-harmonic color coefficients. Formally, each Gaussian Gp at world-space position xp is defined by its covariance matrix Σp and mean xp:

Gp(x) = exp 



− 12 (x − xp)⊤Σ−1 

> p

(x − xp)



(1) The covariance is decomposed as: 

Σp = Rp Sp S⊤ 

> p

R⊤ 

> p

(2) where Rp is a rotation and Sp is a diagonal scaling matrix. To render a novel view, each 3D Gaussian is projected into the image plane via differentiable splatting [24]. Given a camera-to-world affine Jacobian J and a viewing transform matrix W , the covariance in camera coordinates becomes: 

Σ′ 

> p

= JW ΣpW J ⊤ (3) And the resulting 2D Gaussians contribute to pixel color 

C(u) through front-to-back compositing: 

C(u) = 

> N

X

> p=1

αp(u) cp

Y

> q<p

 1 − αq (u) (4) where αp is the effective opacity and cp the color from spherical harmonics. This explicit, point-based formulation replaces costly vol-umetric integration with efficient kernel splatting, enabling real-time rendering at high resolution and facilitating direct scene manipulation. In particular, 3DGS permits per-object editing (e.g., translation, rotation, insertion of external mod-els) and provides a natural interface for physics integration, as demonstrated in Section 3.3 where Gaussian kernels become material points in a MPM solver. 

B. Driving Scene Construction 

To achieve editable and physics-aware simulation, we require a scene representation that is both explicit and efficient for real-time rendering, and that allows objects and background to be processed separately over time. We adopt the Street Gaussians methodology [9]. This approach models a driving sequence as two interleaved Gaussian point clouds: one for the static background and one for each moving object. The background Gaussians are initialized from a sparse Li-DAR point set combined with structure-from-motion (SfM) outputs and then aggregated into a dense field of 3D Gaus-sians through training. Each primitive is defined by:  

> •

a mean position μ, 

> •

an anisotropic covariance matrix Σb = Rb Sb S⊤ 

> b

R⊤ 

> b

, 

> •

an opacity weight αb, and  

> •

view-dependent color coefficients zb encoded with low-order spherical harmonics. Compared to voxel or mesh representations, this explicit form captures fine geometric detail with far fewer primitives, enabling both high-fidelity reconstruction and fast differen-tiable rendering. For moving objects such as vehicles, an off-the-shelf detector is used to segment and track each instance. Un-like the background representation, each dynamic object is represented by a dedicated Gaussian cluster, initially defined in the object’s local frame and then transformed into world coordinates via learned object pose parameters (Rt, T t). That is, each object’s translation and rotation can evolve over time. Because object appearance varies continuously over time and space, standard spherical harmonics cannot capture in-stantaneous changes. To address this, a 4D Fourier spherical harmonics basis is introduced: 

zm,ℓ (t) = 

> k−1

X

> i=0

fi cos 

 iπ Nt

t



(5) where zm,ℓ (t) is the spherical harmonics coefficient at time 

t and fi are the Fourier coefficients. A small set of these co-efficients reconstructs each object’s harmonics weights z(t)

on the fly, avoiding per-frame parameters while preserving view-dependent effects and temporal coherence. At inference time, background and object point clouds are merged into a single point cloud and composite them front-to-back using their opacity weights α. The explicit, instance-aware nature of this representation provides the foundation for editing and physics extensions. Because each object is represented by its own Gaussian cluster and pose, users can relocate or rotate vehicles arbitrarily to create new traffic scenarios. In the following section, we describe how we assign mass, friction, and restitution to these clusters and integrate a differentiable Material Point Method solver, trans-forming static reconstruction into a fully editable, physics-aware simulation environment. 

C. Physics-aware Simulation 

To enable realistic physical interactions in edited driving scenes, Real2Sim integrates a lightweight Material Point Method (MPM) [25] solver directly with the Gaussian rep-resentation generated in the previous section. Each Gaussian primitive is treated as a material particle carrying mass mp,initial volume V tp , position xtp, velocity vtp, and deforma-tion gradient F tp . At each timestep, particle quantities are transferred to an Eulerian grid via C1 B-spline kernels; the grid velocities are then updated, and the updated values are transferred back to particle velocities, positions, and defor-mation gradients. The overall algorithm for MPM integration is summarized in Algorithm 1. To simulate the deformation of Gaussian primitives, fol-lowing the settings in [10], we write down the first-order Fourier approximation of affine transformation as: 

ϕp(X, t ) = xp(t) + Fp(t) ( X − Xp) (6) The Gaussian’s mean and covariance naturally evolve as 

xp(t) = ϕ(Xp, t ), Ap(t) = Fp(t) Σ p Fp(t)⊤ (7) 

Algorithm 1 MPM Integration on Gaussian Primitives 

Require: Particles {p} with (mp, V 0 

> p

, x p, v p, F p) ▷mp: mass, V 0 

> p

: rest volume, xp, v p: position/velocity, Fp:deformation gradient 

Require: Time step ∆t ▷ simulation timestep  

> 1:

for each timestep do  

> 2:

1) Particle-to-Grid (P2G):  

> 3:

for all grid nodes i do  

> 4:

mi ← P 

> p

mp wip ▷ w ip : interpolation weight  

> 5:

(mv )i ← P 

> p

mp vp wip  

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

2) Compute grid forces:  

> 8:

for all grid nodes i do  

> 9:

Pp ← ∂Ψ 

> ∂F

(Fp) ▷ P p: first Piola-Kirchhoff stress, 

Ψ: hyperelastic energy  

> 10:

fi ← − P 

> p

V 0 

> p

Pp ∇wip + f ext  

> i

▷ f ext  

> i

: external forces  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

3) Update grid velocities:  

> 13:

for all grid nodes i do  

> 14:

vi ← (mv )i+∆ t f i 

> mi
> 15:

end for  

> 16:

4) Grid-to-Particle (G2P):  

> 17:

for all particles p do  

> 18:

vp ← P 

> i

vi wip  

> 19:

xp ← xp + ∆ t v p 

> 20:

Fp ←  I + ∆ t P 

> i

vi ∇w⊤

> ip

 Fp ▷ I : identity matrix  

> 21:

end for  

> 22:

end for 

Then a static Gaussian with material-space mean Xp and covariance Ap deforms to 

Gp(x, t ) = exp 



− 12 (x − xp(t)) ⊤Ap(t)−1(x − xp(t)) 



(8) Moreover, it is assumed that the opacity and color co-efficients remain constant during simulation. The deformed Gaussian particles are then rendered with the original splat-ting pipeline. By unifying 3D Gaussian Splatting with MPM, Real2Sim allows users to edit object poses and immediately simu-late collisions, friction, and post-impact trajectories with-out mesh extraction or remeshing, thus generating diverse, physics-aware driving scenarios for downstream perception and control tasks. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Dataset 

We conduct our experiments on Waymo Open Dataset [1], which is a large-scale, high-fidelity benchmark for autonomous driving perception and motion tasks. Its Per-ception Dataset comprises 2,030 driving sequences, each 20s long and recorded at 10 Hz, yielding over 400,000 frames captured by five high-resolution (1920×1280) cameras and a 64-beam LiDAR mounted on a production Waymo vehicle. The original release included sequences across three U.S. cities: Phoenix, San Francisco, and Mountain View, anno-tated with 2D and 3D bounding boxes and consistent tracking IDs for 23 object classes. In our experiments, we utilize some sequences from the Perception Dataset for both reconstruction and downstream evaluation, leveraging its diverse scenarios and rich annota-tions to validate Real2Sim’s dynamic reconstruction, editing, and physics-aware simulation capabilities. 

B. Implementation Details 

All training and inference are performed on a single RTX 4090 GPU with 24 GB of VRAM. For the StreetGaussian model, each scene is trained for 50,000 iterations using the same hyperparameters as the original paper. The physics simulation is decoupled from Gaussian model generation. Specifically, at each timestep, the GS point clouds of individ-ual objects are loaded from the pretrained scene and evolved via MPM integration. The relevant physical parameters are detailed in the following section. 

C. Scene Rendering and Reconstruction 

Gaussian Splatting, due to its high-fidelity rendering capa-bility and extremely fast throughput, has been widely adopted in autonomous driving and robotics. In this subsection we select two sequences from the Waymo Open Dataset for evaluation of scene rendering and reconstruction. Details are provided in Table I.             

> TABLE I SEQUENCES AND FRAME RANGES USED FOR SCENE RENDERING AND RECONSTRUCTION .Sequence ID Cameras Frame Range Image Numbers FPS 002 550-100 505 28.57 031 30-198 594 28.72

Fig. 3 presents the results on Sequence 002. We train on frames 50-100 using five cameras oriented to the left, front-left, front, front-right, and right. In Fig. 3, renderings from the forward-facing camera for frames 50-80 are shown. These renderings closely match the ground truth. We also reconstruct the scene point cloud by taking the center of each Gaussian primitive as a point location, illustrating high-precision recovery of static elements such as the road surface, trees, and walls. Notably, dynamic objects and the static background are modeled separately, enabling object-level editing and providing a foundation for physics-based simulation. Fig. 4 shows rendering and reconstruction on Sequence 031. Here, frames 0-198 from three cameras are used for training, and renderings for frames 0-60 are displayed. The model excels not only at capturing fine details of vehicles and buildings but also at accurately reproducing shadow effects. 

D. Scene Editing 

Gaussian Splatting method of explicitly constructing ren-dered scenes enables arbitrary, on-demand editing. Every object in the scene is represented by a cluster of Gaussian primitives, where each primitive’s rotation is a function of time t, and the object’s position and rotation both vary with t. Hence, by simply specifying an object’s position and rotation, one can effortlessly perform seamless in-scene modification. Fig. 5 presents three editing examples: translation, ro-tation, and duplication. In the first row, the black car is translated from the left lane to the center lane. In the second row, the white car in the center lane is rotated 15° to the right. In the third row, this vehicle is duplicated and then translated in the x-direction (i.e., the forward direction) by two car-lengths. These scene edits produce diverse road scenarios. Compared to introducing additional models from library, directly editing the existing scene physics yields more “realistic” and logically consistent data—scenarios that could plausibly occur in the same environment—thus providing rich training data for downstream tasks such as detection, tracking, and end-to-end autonomous driving models. Our framework also supports loading and editing models external to the original scene. Although this may compromise realism, it offers significant benefits for data augmentation and model generalization, as demonstrated by the CRUISE system [26]. While this capability is feasible, it is not explored further in the present work. 

E. Physics-aware Simulation and Corner Case Generation 

By explicitly endowing each Gaussian primitive with material properties and treating it as a particle, and by solving the dynamics via the Material Point Method (MPM), we achieve near-realistic physical simulation within Gaussian scenes. This approach captures both object-object and object-environment interactions such as collisions and post-impact trajectory generation. 

1) Single Vehicle Collision: Fig. 6 presents collision sim-ulations at two different initial speeds. First, we reconstruct a white SUV from Sequence 031 and place a virtual collision plane directly in its path, assigning the vehicle a specified initial velocity. In the first row, the simulation uses v0 =0.5 m /s. Upon impact, kinetic energy is rapidly released, and the vehicle’s front deforms noticeably. In the second row, the initial velocity is increased to v0 = 2 .5 m /s, producing a faster collision and more severe deformation. Although these speeds are moderate in real-world terms, the deformations appear exaggerated because we have manually configured the vehicle’s material parameters to be more compliant, thereby emphasizing the collision response. Furthermore, due to limited access to accurate physical properties of real vehicles, the simulated behavior cannot exactly replicate reality. The physical parameters used in this collision test and in the two subsequent experiments are listed in Table II. 

2) Multi-vehicle Collision: Fig. 7 shows collision simu-lations of multiple vehicles extracted from Sequence 002. The two white SUVs closest to the camera are assigned an Frame 50 Frame 60 Frame 70 Frame 80 

> Ground Truth  Rendering Reconstruction

Fig. 3. Rendering and reconstruction on Sequence 002. The renderer produces high-fidelity images while outputting Gaussian centers as points for point-cloud reconstruction. Frame 0 Frame 20 Frame 40 Frame 60 

> Ground Truth  Rendering Reconstruction

Fig. 4. Rendering and reconstruction on Sequence 031. The scene is captured in a narrow street, and the renderer faithfully reproduces the shadows. TABLE II PHYSICAL PARAMETER SETTINGS FOR SINGLE -VEHICLE COLLISION , MULTI -VEHICLE COLLISION , AND FALL SIMULATION .Parameters Single Vehicle Collision Multi-vehicle Collision Fall Simulation Explanation 

g(m/s ) 9.8 0 9.8 Gravity 

ν 0.4 0.4 0.4 Poisson’s Ratio 

E(P a ) 2e6 2e6 2e6 Young’s Modulus 

ρ(kg/m 3) 200 200 200 Material Density 

Grid 50 200 200 Grid Resolution 

M aterial Jelly Jelly Jelly Material Type Translation Rotation Ground Truth  Copy 

Fig. 5. Scene editing examples: translation, rotation, and duplication. These results demonstrate the benefit of modeling each object separately and enabling arbitrary in-scene editing. 

initial velocity of v0 = 3 .5 m /s, while the remaining vehicles remain stationary. In this experiment, no virtual ground plane is used. Instead, we set g = 0 to keep all vehicles on the same horizontal plane. The right-hand SUV collides with the vehicle ahead around frame 20 and lifts it into midair. The left-hand SUV collides with the lead vehicle around frame 30, briefly pushing it forward before the lead vehicle moves laterally. This experiment and the single-vehicle collision test pre-sented earlier demonstrate both object-plane and object-object collisions. Such high-degree-of-freedom editing and physical simulation can fill gaps in the corner cases of autonomous driving datasets, which are less common and would lead to long-tailed training distributions[13]. More-over, collecting accident-scene data purely through real-world testing incurs high cost and safety risks. Therefore, by combining Gaussian scene editing with physics simula-tion, we can efficiently generate rich core-case data in the laboratory setting. 

3) Fall Simulation: The previous two experiments present interactions between objects. This subsection simulates object-environment interaction by illustrating a vehicle, ini-tially placed in midair, falling to the ground under gravity. We select Sequence 002 and first extract the road surface from the scene to provide a collision plane for the falling vehicle. Fig. 9 shows two methods for ground-plane ex-traction: the left image uses LiDAR point clouds, and the right uses Gaussian point clouds. We begin by extracting the bounding boxes of all objects, projecting them vertically onto the background point cloud, and then filtering the points in the vicinity of each projected area. The RANSAC algorithm [27] is applied to these points to estimate the ground plane, and a surface collider is created to represent the road. Fig. 8 illustrates the complete fall simulation. The vehicle begins to descend under gravity from frame 0, contacts the ground after approximately 0.5s, and following a slight bounce comes to rest on the road surface. V = 0.5         

> V = 2.5
> Frame 0 Frame 10 Frame 20 Frame 30 Frame 40
> Frame 0 Frame 10 Frame 20 Frame 30 Frame 40

Fig. 6. Simulation of a single-vehicle collision under different initial speeds. At 0.5 m/s, the vehicle hits the preset wall at frame 30 and exhibits mild frontal deformation, whereas at 2.5 m/s it shows more severe deformation. Frame 0 Frame 10 Frame 20 Frame 30    

> Frame 40 Frame 50 Frame 60 Frame 70

Fig. 7. Simulation of a multi-vehicle collision. The two white SUVs closest to the camera are forced to collide with the stationary vehicles ahead. Frame 0 Frame 10 Frame 20 Frame 30 

Frame 40 Frame 50 Frame 60 Frame 70 

Fig. 8. all simulation. The vehicles are first elevated to a predefined height and then released to freely fall onto the extracted ground plane. 

V. C ONCLUSION 

This paper introduces Real2Sim, an autonomous-driving scene simulation system built on Gaussian Splatting with full support for physics-level modeling. By representing each object as a cluster of Gaussian primitives, Real2Sim enables out-of-the-box high-degree-of-freedom scene edit-ing. It further treats each Gaussian primitive as a particle and feeds it into an MPM-based physics engine, achieving realistic object-object and object-environment interactions. This unified framework provides an efficient, laboratory-scale approach for generating corner-case data, thereby sup-porting downstream tasks such as detection, tracking, motion prediction, and end-to-end autonomous-driving model train-ing. This work has several limitations that require further study. First, Gaussian modeling depends on the number of training viewpoints. In our editing and physics simulation experi-Object Boundary 

> Object Boundary

Fig. 9. Road-plane detection using RANSAC (inlier points shown in red). The left image uses LiDAR inputs, while the right uses Gaussian points. 

ments, some vehicles appear blurred or partially incomplete from unseen angles due to limited view coverage. Future work will address this by expanding the dataset or using diffusion models to refine and complete Gaussian representa-tions. Second, rendering and physics simulation are currently decoupled. The simulation uses a Gaussian snapshot from a single timestep to predict subsequent physical behavior, which may deviate from the original Gaussian distribution and degrade rendering quality. Future work will explore an end-to-end joint estimation framework. Finally, vehicle physical parameters require further calibration. Currently, each vehicle is modeled as a single soft body, limiting the simulation of detailed dynamics such as tire-road friction. We plan to develop decomposed Gaussian models that better reflect vehicle structures. REFERENCES [1] P. Sun, H. Kretzschmar, X. Dotiwalla, A. Chouard, V. Patnaik, P. Tsui, J. Guo, Y. Zhou, Y. Chai, B. Caine et al. , “Scalability in perception for autonomous driving: Waymo open dataset,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,2020, pp. 2446–2454. [2] Z. Yang, Y. Chai, D. Anguelov, Y. Zhou, P. Sun, D. Erhan, S. Rafferty, and H. Kretzschmar, “Surfelgan: Synthesizing realistic sensor data for autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2020, pp. 11 118–11 127. [3] L. Russell, A. Hu, L. Bertoni, G. Fedoseev, J. Shotton, E. Arani, and G. Corrado, “Gaia-2: A controllable multi-view generative world model for autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20523 ,2025. [4] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoor-thi, and R. Ng, “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis,” Communications of the ACM , vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 99–106, 2021. [5] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¨ uhler, and G. Drettakis, “3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering.” ACM Trans. Graph. ,vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 139–1, 2023. [6] G. Wu, T. Yi, J. Fang, L. Xie, X. Zhang, W. Wei, W. Liu, Q. Tian, and X. Wang, “4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2024, pp. 20 310–20 320. [7] Y. Duan, F. Wei, Q. Dai, Y. He, W. Chen, and B. Chen, “4d-rotor gaussian splatting: towards efficient novel view synthesis for dynamic scenes,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers , 2024, pp. 1–11. [8] X. Zhou, Z. Lin, X. Shan, Y. Wang, D. Sun, and M.-H. Yang, “Drivinggaussian: Composite gaussian splatting for surrounding dy-namic autonomous driving scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2024, pp. 21 634–21 643. [9] Y. Yan, H. Lin, C. Zhou, W. Wang, H. Sun, K. Zhan, X. Lang, X. Zhou, and S. Peng, “Street gaussians: Modeling dynamic urban scenes with gaussian splatting,” in European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 2024, pp. 156–173. [10] T. Xie, Z. Zong, Y. Qiu, X. Li, Y. Feng, Y. Yang, and C. Jiang, “Phys-gaussian: Physics-integrated 3d gaussians for generative dynamics,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024, pp. 4389–4398. [11] P. Borycki, W. Smolak, J. Waczy´ nska, M. Mazur, S. Tadeja, and P. Spurek, “Gasp: Gaussian splatting for physic-based simulations,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.05819 , 2024. [12] Y. Jiang, C. Yu, T. Xie, X. Li, Y. Feng, H. Wang, M. Li, H. Lau, F. Gao, Y. Yang et al. , “Vr-gs: A physical dynamics-aware interactive gaussian splatting system in virtual reality,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers , 2024, pp. 1–1. [13] Y. Zhang, B. Kang, B. Hooi, S. Yan, and J. Feng, “Deep long-tailed learning: A survey,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 10 795–10 816, 2023. [14] J. L. Schonberger and J.-M. Frahm, “Structure-from-motion revisited,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2016, pp. 4104–4113. [15] C. R. Qi, H. Su, K. Mo, and L. J. Guibas, “Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets for 3d classification and segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,2017, pp. 652–660. [16] Y. Zhou and O. Tuzel, “Voxelnet: End-to-end learning for point cloud based 3d object detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 2018, pp. 4490–4499. [17] C. Choy, J. Gwak, and S. Savarese, “4d spatio-temporal convnets: Minkowski convolutional neural networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,2019, pp. 3075–3084. [18] J. Li, Z. Feng, Q. She, H. Ding, C. Wang, and G. H. Lee, “Mine: Towards continuous depth mpi with nerf for novel view synthesis,” in 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2021, pp. 12 578–12 588. [19] A. Kundu, K. Genova, X. Yin, A. Fathi, C. Pantofaru, L. J. Guibas, A. Tagliasacchi, F. Dellaert, and T. Funkhouser, “Panoptic neural fields: A semantic object-aware neural scene representation,” in Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2022, pp. 12 871–12 881. [20] K. Gao, Y. Gao, H. He, D. Lu, L. Xu, and J. Li, “Nerf: Neural radiance field in 3d vision, a comprehensive review,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00379 , 2022. [21] S. Zhu, G. Wang, X. Kong, D. Kong, and H. Wang, “3d gaussian splatting in robotics: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12262 ,2024. [22] H. Caesar, V. Bankiti, A. H. Lang, S. Vora, V. E. Liong, Q. Xu, A. Krishnan, Y. Pan, G. Baldan, and O. Beijbom, “nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,2020, pp. 11 621–11 631. [23] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V. Koltun, “Carla: An open urban driving simulator,” in Conference on robot learning .PMLR, 2017, pp. 1–16. [24] W. Yifan, F. Serena, S. Wu, C. ¨Oztireli, and O. Sorkine-Hornung, “Differentiable surface splatting for point-based geometry processing,” 

ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG) , vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 1–14, 2019. [25] C. Jiang, C. Schroeder, J. Teran, A. Stomakhin, and A. Selle, “The material point method for simulating continuum materials,” in Acm siggraph 2016 courses , 2016, pp. 1–52. [26] H. Xu, S. Zhang, P. Li, B. Ye, X. Chen, H.-a. Gao, J. Zheng, X. Song, Z. Peng, R. Miao et al. , “Cruise: Cooperative reconstruction and editing in v2x scenarios using gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.18473 , 2025. [27] M. A. Fischler and R. C. Bolles, “Random sample consensus: a paradigm for model fitting with applications to image analysis and automated cartography,” Communications of the ACM , vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 381–395, 1981.