Title: Premover: Fast Vision-Language-Action Control by Acting Before Instructions Are Complete

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12160v1

Published Time: Wed, 13 May 2026 01:22:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Premover: Fast Vision-Language-Action Control by Acting Before Instructions Are Complete 

Joonha Park 1,2 Jiseung Jeong 1 Taesik Gong 11UNIST, Ulsan, Republic of Korea 

> 2

The Catholic University of Korea, Bucheon, Republic of Korea 

developerha0013@gmail.com, {wjdwltmd1151,taesik.gong}@unist.ac.kr 

## Abstract 

Vision-Language-Action (VLA) policies are typically evaluated as if the user had finished typing or speaking before the robot begins acting. In real deployment, however, users take several seconds to enter a request, leaving the policy idle for a substantial fraction of the interaction. We introduce Premover , a lightweight module that converts this idle window into useful precomputation. Premover keeps the VLA backbone frozen and attaches two small projection heads—one for image patches, one for language tokens—that map an intermediate layer of the backbone into a shared space. The resulting focus map is supervised by simulator-rendered target-object segmentation masks and applied as a per-patch reweighting of the next step’s image tokens. A single scalar readiness threshold, trained jointly from streaming prefixes, decides when the policy should begin acting. On the LIBERO benchmark suite, Premover reduces mean wall-clock time from 34.0 to 29.4 seconds, a 13.6% reduction, while matching the full-prompt baseline’s success rate (95.1% vs. 95.0%); naive premoving, by contrast, collapses to 66.4%. 

## 1 Introduction 0 10 20 30 40 50       

> Time (s)
> Spatial
> Object
> Goal
> 10
> Average
> 17.7s 13.4s
> 12.3s 18.2s
> 8.3s 15.6s
> 15.2s 35.1s
> 39% 61%
> Instruction (idle) Forward + Actions

Figure 1: Ratio of LIBERO interaction time. Hatched bars show user instruc-tion input (typing at 52 .24 WPM); solid bars show VLA inference. Recent work on efficient Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models focuses on reducing inference latency once the instruction is available [ 21 , 13 , 20 , 16 ]. In deployment, however, the instruction is not available immediately: the user takes several seconds to type or speak it, and the policy remains idle until the input completes. Even for the short instructions considered in current VLA bench-marks, this input time accounts for a substantial fraction of the total interaction time, averaging 39% across the four LIBERO suites (Figure 1; assuming a typing rate of 

52 .24 WPM [ 5]). Standard evaluation protocols [ 11 ] omit this interval entirely by presenting the full instruction in advance. We argue that this interval should not be treated as dead time. We refer to the partial instruction observed so far as the streaming prefix . Even an incomplete streaming prefix such as “pick up the ketchup. . . ” already excludes most of the visual scene as irrelevant, and a policy that begins grounding its visual representation in the streaming prefix while the user is still entering the instruction has less work to do once the full instruction is available, reducing total completion time. Acting on a streaming prefix, however, introduces a risk: the same prefix that narrows the relevant regions can also commit the robot to a wrong target before the language reveals what to commit to.                            

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.12160v1 [cs.RO] 12 May 2026 Premover ㏙Ours㏚
> Conventional VLA
> no forward (idle)
> Premover acts 㚕9s earlier
> (during instruction input)
> [ act ] forward forward [ act ] [ act ]
> forward forward [ act ] forward [ act ] [ act ]
> Pick up the ketchup and put it in the basket
> Pick up the ketchup and put it in the basket

~13.6% lower 

end -to -end latency   

> 13s for instruction 20s for actions
> idle time
> forward time
> action time

Figure 2: Conventional VLA inference vs. Premover. Conventional VLAs (top) idle during instruction input—nearly 40% of total interaction time—before running a forward pass. Premover (bottom) conducts forward passes during the user’s input, so that the focus map highlights the target referent in the streaming prefix and a learned readiness gate decides when to commit to actions, reducing end-to-end latency to 86.4% of the full-prompt baseline on LIBERO. Resolving this trade-off requires two coupled capabilities. The policy must decide (i) where to focus given a streaming prefix and (ii) when the streaming prefix is informative enough to start an action. The grounded image patches serve as a relevance prior that aligns the policy with the instruction during the streaming prefix, and execution is withheld until that prior has localized a referent. We introduce Premover , a lightweight module that operates on top of a frozen VLA backbone. Premover consists of two complementary components: a focus map and a readiness gate . The focus map is a per-patch relevance distribution that captures where the streaming prefix points in the scene. The readiness gate decides when the prefix is informative enough to release the policy to act. Both are computed from a shared latent space: two small modality-specific projection heads—one for image patches, one for language tokens—map an intermediate output into the same coordinates, and the focus map is formed by comparing each image patch against the streaming prefix tokens in this space. The readiness score is computed from the focus map, and once it exceeds a learnable threshold, the policy starts acting. Because the heads are small and the backbone is never updated, training is cheap, and the pretrained backbone weights are preserved exactly. Figure 2 contrasts Premover with conventional inference: where a conventional VLA waits for the prompt to be complete before its first forward pass, Premover interleaves focus map computation with the user’s typing and begins acting before the prompt is finalized. We evaluate Premover on π0.5 [ 2], a recent vision-language-action model with hierarchical subtask prediction. We use two simulated benchmarks: LIBERO [ 11 ] (Spatial, Object, Goal, and LIBERO-10) and VLA-arena [ 22 ] (Extrapolation, Distractor, Safe, and Long-horizon). Both expose the per-instance segmentation masks needed for focus map supervision, and they cover distinct task distributions, scene compositions, and instruction styles. Premover reduces end-to-end wall-clock time with little to no loss in full-prompt success rate; for example, on the LIBERO benchmark suite, Premover reduces mean wall-clock time from 34 .0 to 29 .4 seconds, a 13 .6% reduction, while matching the full-prompt baseline’s success rate (95.1% vs. 95.0%). Naive premoving, by contrast, collapses to 66 .4% . As VLA forward passes and action execution continue to improve with better models, runtimes, and hardware, the user-input interval will become an increasingly dominant source of latency ; we believe Premover takes an important step toward efficient and responsive real-world VLA applications by turning this otherwise idle interval into actionable computation. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Vision-Language-Action Models 

Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models [ 3, 8] extend vision-language pretraining to robotic control by treating actions as tokens predicted alongside language. Subsequent work introduces continuous action representations based on diffusion or flow matching for high-frequency dexterous control [ 4 ,1, 15 , 18 ]. π0.5 [2 ] adds a hierarchical inference procedure that first predicts a semantic subtask 2label from the high-level instruction and then conditions the low-level action chunk on this subtask, establishing a current reference point for VLA performance. At the same time, language grounding remains an important challenge in VLA studies: without explicit region-level alignment, end-to-end imitation may leave VLA policies attending to visually salient but instruction-irrelevant regions. Several VLA-specific efforts have addressed this gap. Some modify the VLA itself: Knowledge Insulation [ 6] preserves the VLM backbone’s pretrained vision-language knowledge by blocking action-expert gradients during training; RoboGround [ 7]uses a separately fine-tuned grounded VLM to produce target masks for the policy; and Recon-VLA [ 19 ] adds a gaze-region reconstruction objective. Others operate on frozen VLAs with auxiliary modules: VAP [ 10 ] equips a frozen VLA with selective attention using open-vocabulary detection over reference images, while PVI [ 23 ] injects auxiliary visual representations into a frozen action expert through residual pathways. These methods are designed for finalized instructions. Premover targets a complementary regime—grounding partial instructions as they stream in—through two small projection heads on the frozen backbone that capture both where to focus and when the prefix is actionable. 

2.2 VLA Inference Acceleration 

A growing body of work targets the inference-time efficiency of VLA policies. DeeR-VLA [ 21 ]attaches dynamic early-exit gates so that easier frames terminate at shallower layers. VLA-Pruner [ 13 ]prunes redundant image tokens from the prefix using a saliency criterion. TinyVLA [ 20 ] distills the policy into a compact backbone, trading some success rate for substantially faster inference. FAST [ 16 ] compresses the action sequence via frequency-domain tokenization, so fewer tokens are emitted per decision. These directions differ in what they optimize—layers traversed, tokens attended to, or action tokens emitted—but share a common objective: reducing the wall-clock time the policy takes once it has received the instruction. We note that an important source of latency in real human-robot interaction lies on a different axis: the 

input-side interval during which the user is still typing or speaking, while the environment is already present and stable. At an average typing speed of ∼52.24 WPM [ 5], the twelve-word instructions in LIBERO take roughly twelve seconds to enter, during which the techniques above have nothing to optimize. This interval persists at human-input scale and is therefore not reduced by faster forward passes; as post-input inference becomes faster, it grows as a share of total interaction time. The question is instead what the policy should do while the instruction arrives: how early it can begin grounding visual attention to partial language, and when it is safe to start acting. We study this streaming-prefix regime by computing focus maps from partial instructions and learning when those partial instructions carry enough evidence to commit to action. 

## 3 Method 

Motivation and challenges. Conventional VLA inference assumes that the full instruction (i.e., query) is available before the policy begins computation. In practice, this assumption leaves the policy idle for a large portion of the interaction time: users enter instructions over several seconds, and at the typical typing rate of 52 .24 WPM [ 5 ], this input phase accounts for an estimated 17 .69 seconds out of 31 .05 total seconds on LIBERO-Spatial, around 57% of the full interaction time (averaging 39% across the four LIBERO suites). The conventional evaluation protocol does not account for this interval. This raises a natural question: can the policy begin processing the request while the user is still entering it? We refer to the partial instruction observed so far as the streaming prefix , and ask whether the input interval can be converted into useful policy computation. Leveraging streaming prefixes for early execution requires resolving two coupled challenges. (i) 

Where to attend under partial language : a prefix such as “pick up the ketchup. . . ” may already identify the task-relevant object before the full instruction is complete. However, a frozen VLA backbone is not explicitly trained to localize the referent of a partial instruction: its vision-language alignment, learned indirectly through action imitation, can spread across background patches and distractor objects rather than concentrate on the referred region [ 25 ]. (ii) When to start acting : acting before the prefix has identified the referent can commit the robot to the wrong target, whereas waiting for the full instruction forfeits the latency benefit of streaming input. The policy therefore needs a readiness criterion for deciding when the prefix is sufficiently informative to act. 3Trainable Premover                                      

> ViT
> “Pick up the
> ketchup…”
> Frozen VLA Backbone
> ViT
> Agent View
> Wrist View
> Streaming Prefix
> 𝑝 !
> 𝜎 (·)
> 𝒎𝒂𝒙
> 𝒋 𝑺 𝒊 ,𝒋 cosine
> similarity
> z%
> %&'
> z(
> )*+'
> Vision Focus Head
> Lang Focus Head
> j=0
> j=1
> j=2
> j=3
> j=4
> Token index jFocus Map (§3.1)
> pre -trained VLA
> ViT + Language
> sum( )
> k
> sum( )
> N
> −𝒓 𝒕 =
> Action Readiness Gate (§3.2)
> Small r!(Small gap) ⇒focus dispersed (not ready)
> Large r!(Large gap) ⇒focus concentrated (ready)
> Hold (focus dispersed) Act
> “Pick up” “Pick up the” “Pick up the ketchup ”

𝑡 

𝑡 + 1 𝜏   

> Vis -Lang Similarity Patch Probability Reweighted Input

Figure 3: Premover overview. Two trainable projection heads, attached to a frozen VLA backbone, produce a focus map (3.1) by comparing image patches with streaming-prefix tokens in a shared latent space. The map at step t reweights image tokens at step t + 1 , and an action readiness gate—a learnable scalar threshold τ on the readiness score rt—decides when the policy starts acting. 

Method overview. Figure 3 illustrates Premover, a lightweight module attached to a frozen VLA backbone. Premover addresses the aforementioned two challenges with two components. (i) To improve visual grounding from partial language , Premover computes a focus map : a per-patch relevance distribution indicating which image regions are referred to by the current streaming prefix. The focus map is produced by two projection heads that map the backbone’s image-patch and language-token hidden states into a shared latent space, where each image patch is compared against the streaming prefix tokens. The resulting relevance scores are applied as a soft overlay to the next step’s image tokens, guiding the frozen backbone toward the prefix referent without updating the backbone itself. (ii) To decide when to start acting , Premover introduces a readiness gate . It measures how concentrated the focus map has become and compares this concentration to a single learnable threshold, deciding when to start acting. Intuitively, the policy begins acting once the prefix has localized a sufficiently specific visual target. 

Problem formulation. We consider VLA control when the instruction is revealed incrementally rather than given in full at the start. Let ℓ1: k denote the first k instruction tokens observed so far. At robot control step s, given ℓ1: k, the current image observations, and the proprioceptive state, the policy produces an action chunk as:s+M for the next M control steps. Unlike the conventional setting in which this action chunk is executed as soon as it is produced, the streaming setting must additionally decide whether to execute it: early prefixes may not yet reveal the target object, and executing 

as:s+M could move the robot before the instruction has specified what to do. The full-instruction evaluation protocol used by conventional VLA benchmarks is the special case in which the full instruction is available from the start, so the execute/hold decision never arises; we use it as the oracle full-instruction baseline in terms of success rate throughout this paper. 

3.1 Vision-Language Focus Map 

Acting on a streaming prefix first requires estimating where the prefix refers. A prefix such as “pick up the ketchup. . . ” already restricts the scene to a small subset of image patches; if the policy can recover those patches from partial language, it obtains a relevance prior for visual processing. A frozen VLA backbone does not directly expose such a prior. Figure 4 illustrates the limitation: the backbone’s vision-language alignment, learned only indirectly through action imitation, assigns substantial mass to background regions and distractor objects rather than concentrating on the referent. This dispersion may be tolerable when the full instruction is available, but it becomes problematic in the streaming setting, where the language context is incomplete and referent localization must rely more heavily on visual grounding. We therefore make this alignment explicit with a supervised focus map : a per-patch distribution that localizes the referent indicated by the streaming prefix. 

Focus Map. We introduce two modality-specific projection heads fimg and flang that map an intermediate layer of the frozen backbone into a shared latent space [ 17 ]. Let Himg  

> i

∈ Rd denote 4Task 1: Pick up the alphabet soup and place it in the basket Task 2: Pick up the cream cheese and place it in the basket          

> (i)Original RGB (ii) Original Attn. Map (iii) Focus Map (i)Original RGB (ii) Original Attn. Map (iii) Focus Map

Figure 4: From dispersed attention to a Focus Map. The learned focus map gathers attention that was previously dispersed across the scene and concentrates it on the target object and goal location, aligning vision with the language instruction. (Original RGB) agent-view RGB; (Original Attention Map) the frozen backbone’s implicit alignment, with mass leaking onto background regions; (Focus Map) our supervised focus map. the hidden state of image patch i ∈ { 1, . . . , N } at this layer, and Hlang  

> j

∈ Rd the hidden state of language token j ∈ { 1, . . . , L } within the streaming prefix, where d is the backbone hidden width, 

N is the total number of image patches across the available camera views, and L is the number of valid tokens in the streaming prefix. Both projection heads are 2-layer MLPs with GELU activations, and their outputs are ℓ2-normalized onto the unit sphere: 

zimg  

> i

= ˜fimg 



Himg 

> i



, zlang  

> j

= ˜flang 



Hlang 

> j



, (1) where ˜f (·) = f (·)/∥f (·)∥2. For each (patch, token) pair we compute the cosine similarity Si,j in this shared space, take the maximum over tokens of the streaming prefix to obtain a per-patch score, multiply by a logit scale s, and pass through a sigmoid to yield a per-patch probability pi:

Si,j = ⟨zimg  

> i

, z lang  

> j

⟩, pi = σ



s · max  

> j∈{ 1,...,L }

Si,j 



∈ [0 , 1] . (2) We refer to p = ( p1, . . . , p N ) ∈ [0 , 1] N as the focus map , where pi is the learned probability that image patch i is relevant to the streaming prefix. Although Himg and Hlang share the hidden dimensionality d inside the backbone, the two modalities are not directly comparable in that space: each is organized around features informative for its own objective, and semantically related patches and tokens do not necessarily align. The projection heads re-express the two modalities along axes that align matched patch-token pairs, and the ℓ2 normalization that follows ensures that the cosine similarity in Si,j measures directional agreement rather than raw inner-product magnitude. 

Supervision. We supervise the focus map with the target-object segmentation mask m⋆ ∈ { 0, 1}N

rendered by the simulator. The loss is a class-balanced per-patch Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE): 

Lfocus = −

PNi=1 βi

h

m⋆i log pi + (1 − m⋆i ) log(1 − pi)

iPNi=1 βi

. (3) Let N+ = P 

> i

m⋆i and N− = N − N+ denote the numbers of positive and negative patches in m⋆,respectively. We assign βi = N−/ max( N+, 1) to positive patches ( m⋆i = 1 ) and βi = 1 to negative patches ( m⋆i = 0 ), so βi compensates for class imbalance without changing the frozen backbone; gradients flow only through the two projection heads. 

Focus Map Injection. The focus map identifies which image patches are relevant to the streaming prefix, but training it alone does not change what the backbone attends to. Since the backbone is frozen, the policy still consumes the original image at inference. We therefore use the focus map as an input reweighting that suppresses irrelevant patches and amplifies patches around the target object before the backbone processes them. The most direct way to do this would be to inject the focus map into the same step from which it was computed, but the focus map is itself derived from that step’s hidden states. Reweighting the input in the same step, therefore, requires a second forward pass, doubling inference cost. Since actions and attention distributions of a VLA policy at adjacent timesteps are typically similar [ 24 ], we instead reuse the focus map from step t as the input 5reweighting at step t+1 . Let pt ∈ [0 , 1] N denote the focus map computed at step t, with pt,i its i-th patch entry. We apply it through an injection weight w, parameterized by a floor scale α ∈ [0 , 1] , that interpolates between the focus map and a uniform floor—a constant weight of 1 applied identically to every patch: 

wt, i = α + (1 − α) pt, i , α ∈ [0 , 1] , (4) and rescale each image token embedding multiplicatively: 

ˆeimg  

> t+1 , i

= wt, i · eimg 

> t+1 , i

, i = 1 , . . . , N, (5) where eimg  

> t+1

is the prefix image token embedding at step t+1 and ˆeimg  

> t+1

is the reweighted input. The two limits give the design intuition: α = 1 disables the injection (i.e., uniform weights), while 

α = 0 fully mutes non-target patches. The intermediate range matters because non-target tokens still carry scene context—obstacle avoidance, gripper alignment with the table, and coarse workspace reasoning—that the frozen backbone relies on for behaviors not tied to the target referent. Setting 

α > 0 preserves these capabilities while still amplifying instruction-relevant tokens. We select α on a held-out calibration set (see Appendix A), which gives α = 0 .2. An ablation study of α is provided in Section 4.3. 

3.2 Action Readiness Gate 

Even with a sharpened focus map, the policy still needs to decide when to start acting on the streaming prefix. Acting on a streaming prefix that does not yet contain the target referent forces the policy to commit before the language reveals what to commit to, and the resulting action shifts the scene state in ways that are hard to recover once the full instruction arrives. Waiting until the instruction completes, on the other hand, wastes the entire input interval. When the per-patch probabilities of pt are spread roughly uniformly across the image, we say pt is 

dispersed , and concentrated when the mass is localized to a small region. A dispersed pt means the streaming prefix has not yet localized a referent, while a concentrated pt means the streaming prefix has localized one. The policy can therefore safely begin acting once pt is concentrated, since the target referent is now present in the focus map. 

Learnable Action Readiness. The criterion described above is intuitive but not directly measurable. We therefore propose the action readiness score rt, a metric that becomes large when probability mass is locally concentrated and small when it is dispersed across the image. We then define an 

action readiness threshold τ to operationalize prefix-level commitment: at each streaming step, the policy waits if rt < τ and commits to acting once rt ≥ τ .

rt = 1

K

X 

> i∈T K(pt)

pt,i 

| {z } 

> top-Kmean

− 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

pt,i 

| {z }

> global mean

, (6) where TK (pt) denotes the indices of the top K entries of pt. We set K = 10 in our experiments, and details are in Appendix B. The first term measures activation strength on the most salient patches, and the second measures a baseline level that includes the background; their difference captures how concentrated the target-related activation is, and mitigates the inflation that a plain top-K mean would suffer under widespread background noise. A single learnable scalar τ ∈ R then gates action execution: execute action at t ⇐⇒ rt ≥ τ. (7) 

Supervision. For each training frame, we sample streaming prefixes of the instruction and assign a binary label y ∈ { 0, 1} according to whether the target object has appeared in the prefix. To make the binary decision differentiable, we form a logit by dividing the gap between the readiness score and the threshold by a temperature T > 0, and apply Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE) on it: 

Lready = BCE 

 rt − τT , y 



. (8) The temperature T smooths the decision boundary around the threshold and stabilizes training. For prefixes in which the target has not yet emerged, we do not apply the focus map supervision in (3) 6and use only the readiness term: in such intervals the only meaningful training signal is “it is too early,” and injecting a noisy oracle mask would otherwise degrade the precision of the focus map. 

3.3 Training Objective Streaming Prefix-Readiness loss. The two components are jointly trained within a single forward pass. The final objective is a weighted sum of the focus map supervision in (3) and the readiness supervision in (8): 

L = λfocus Lfocus + λready Lready , (9) where λfocus , λ ready ∈ R≥0 are the relative weights of the two terms. 

Trainable parameters. All backbone parameters remain frozen; gradients flow only through the image projection head fimg , the language projection head flang , and the readiness threshold τ .Together these account for less than 1% of the backbone’s parameter count, so cross-modal focusing and streaming readiness can be acquired without large-scale VLA retraining. A detailed training setup is provided in Appendix A. 

## 4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Backbones, benchmarks, and splits. We evaluate on frozen π0.5 [2 ] on LIBERO [ 11 ] and the Level-1 suites of VLA-arena [ 22 ]. Both simulators expose per-instance segmentation masks, which serve as oracle masks m⋆ for focus-map supervision (§3.1). For each benchmark, we partition the 50 

episodes per task into three disjoint splits: training, α-calibration, and evaluation. Calibration details are in Appendix A. 

Metrics and streaming protocol. We evaluate Premover on LIBERO [ 11 ] and the Level-1 suites of VLA-arena [ 22 ]. Wall-Clock Time (All) is computed from mean wall-clock time over all episodes; 

Wall-Clock Time (Succ.) restricts this to successful episodes. The two metrics capture complementary effects: failed episodes that wander until timeout can inflate the overall mean, while success-only ratios can appear selective on a smaller subset of completed episodes. Reading them together separates a real inference-time reduction from one that merely reflects how the policy handles failures. During streaming evaluation, tokens are revealed on a schedule synchronized with the policy’s per-step inference latency at a reference typing rate of 52 .24 WPM [ 5]. Implementation details are in Appendix A. 

4.2 Main Results 

We compare three settings on the same underlying policy. Full-prompt follows the standard LIBERO protocol, where the complete instruction is provided before action begins. Naive premoving streams the prompt token by token and executes at every step, regardless of how much of the instruction has arrived. Premover uses the same streaming protocol but applies the focus map to reweight image tokens at every step and begins executing only once the readiness score rt exceeds the threshold τ ,after which it proceeds as in the full-prompt setting. Table 1 reports per-suite success and end-to-end interaction time on the four LIBERO suites. Naive Premoving drops mean success from 95 .0% to 66 .4% , reflecting the risk of naively acting before the target is properly identified. Premover recovers most of this degradation, within 0.1%p gap to the full-prompt baseline, while still operating under streaming input. On LIBERO-Object, Premover even exceeds the full-prompt baseline ( 97 .4% → 99 .1% ), suggesting that explicit visual supervision via our focus map can improve distractor disambiguation beyond the frozen backbone. The ablation study of our components is in Section 4.3. Premover also reduces mean end-to-end interaction time from 34 .0 s to 29 .4 s, corresponding to 

86 .4% of the full-prompt baseline’s Wall-Clock Time (All). Naive premoving instead has 101 .5% 

Wall-Clock Time (All)—i.e., slower than full-prompt—despite a 67 .8% Wall-Clock Time (Succ.), while Premover improves both. This confirms that the readiness gate captures input-time latency without the success collapse of unconstrained streaming. The same trend holds with the Level-1 7Table 1: LIBERO results. Per-suite success rate and end-to-end wall-clock time, evaluated over 350 rollouts per suite. Percentages in parentheses report wall time relative to the full-prompt baseline, where full-prompt is 100% . Wall-Clock Time (All) averages over all rollouts; Wall-Clock Time (Succ.) restricts to successful rollouts. Lower wall-clock time is better. The full-prompt baseline’s wall-clock time includes the typing interval (Appendix D). Naive premoving collapses on success (95 .0 → 66 .4% ); Premover recovers to 95 .1% while reducing mean all-rollout wall-clock time to 

86 .4% of the full-prompt baseline. 

Metric Setting Spat. Obj. Goal L-10 Mean 

Success Rate ↑

Full-prompt 99.4% 97.4% 94.9% 88.3% 95.0% Naive Premoving 68.3% 64.6% 56.6% 76.0% 66.4% 

Premover (ours) 98.6% 99.1% 93.7% 88.9% 95.1% Wall-Clock Time (All) ↓

Full-prompt 31.0s (100.0%) 30.7s (100.0%) 23.8s (100.0%) 50.8s (100.0%) 34.0s (100.0%) 

Naive Premoving 27.4s (88.5%) 32.3s (105.5%) 34.8s (146.5%) 43.6s (85.8%) 34.5s (101.5%) 

Premover (ours) 22.7s (73.2%) 24.4s (79.7%) 21.9s (92.2%) 48.6s (95.7%) 29.4s (86.4%) 

Wall-Clock Time (Succ.) ↓

Full-prompt 30.8s (100.0%) 29.7s (100.0%) 21.5s (100.0%) 45.2s (100.0%) 31.8s (100.0%) 

Naive Premoving 15.5s (50.4%) 19.6s (66.1%) 16.8s (78.2%) 32.2s (71.1%) 21.6s (67.8%) 

Premover (ours) 21.6s (70.2%) 24.1s (81.3%) 19.2s (89.2%) 44.5s (98.4%) 27.3s (86.0%) 

Table 2: VLA-arena Level-1 suites results with π0.5 on selected episodes 15 –49 . Same convention as Tab. 1. Wall Time (Succ.) on Long Horizon is reported as ‘–’ since success is 0% for all three settings. Naive premoving suffers a 6.0%p success drop ( 33 .0 → 27 .0% ); Premover preserves more of the success rate ( 30 .9% ) while reducing mean all-rollout wall time to 89 .7% of the full-prompt baseline. 

Metric Setting Extr. Distr. Safe LongH Mean 

Success Rate ↑

Full-prompt 25.1% 39.4% 41.8% 0.0% 33.0% Naive Premoving 8.6% 32.9% 41.0% 0.0% 27.0% 

Premover (ours) 25.9% 41.4% 35.9% 0.0% 30.9% Wall-Clock Time (All) ↓

Full-prompt 99.9s (100.0%) 67.7s (100.0%) 68.4s (100.0%) 162.3s (100.0%) 85.4s (100.0%) 

Naive Premoving 92.3s (92.5%) 59.8s (88.3%) 53.5s (78.2%) 147.9s (91.2%) 73.8s (86.5%) 

Premover (ours) 87.0s (87.1%) 59.9s (88.4%) 62.7s (91.6%) 148.4s (91.5%) 76.6s (89.7%) 

Wall-Clock Time (Succ.) ↓

Full-prompt 49.6s (100.0%) 32.0s (100.0%) 32.6s (100.0%) – 36.0s (100.0%) 

Naive Premoving 31.9s (64.4%) 21.8s (68.2%) 19.5s (59.7%) – 21.1s (58.5%) 

Premover (ours) 43.5s (87.7%) 25.6s (80.0%) 23.8s (72.8%) – 28.7s (79.8%) 

suites of VLA-arena (Table 2): naive premoving reaches 86 .5% Wall-Clock Time (All), but drops mean success from 33 .0% to 27 .0% , whereas Premover achieves 89 .7% Wall-Clock Time (All) while preserving mean success at 30 .9% . The streaming-prefix benefit is therefore not LIBERO-specific. We ablate each component of Premover to identify which design choices drive the recovery from naive streaming. All ablations use LIBERO under the readiness-gated streaming setting, with mean success across the four suites as the primary metric. 

4.3 Ablations 

Table 3: Component ablation. Mean success (%) on four LIBERO suites. Most gains come from the readiness gate; the focus map adds the rest. 

Stream Focus Ready Spat. Obj. Goal L-10 Avg 

✓ 68.5 64.8 57.0 75.8 66.5 

✓ ✓ 69.8 68.5 60.0 79.5 69.5 

✓ ✓ 84.0 94.5 91.5 83.8 88.4 

✓ ✓ ✓ 98.6 99.1 93.7 88.9 95.1 

Component ablation. Table 3 decomposes the gap between naive premoving and the full-prompt upper bound into the contributions of Premover’s two components. The readiness gate alone recovers 21 .9%p of mean success (66 .5% → 88 .4% ). Adding focus map injection on top adds another 6.7%p to reach 95 .1% . The two components address complementary aspects of partial-prefix execution: the readiness gate supplies the temporal discipline that prevents 8commitment before the prefix has stabilized, while the focus map injection supplies the per-patch signal that biases the backbone’s attention toward the target referent once action begins. Most of the recovery comes from when the policy acts; the remaining headroom comes from what it sees. 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0  

> Floor scale α
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Mean success rate

Figure 5: Floor scale in focus map in-jection. Mean success (%) averaged over the full evaluation episodes per task. 

Floor scale in focus map injection. Figure 5 shows the floor scale α (Eq. 4) sweep on the full evaluation episodes. The two extremes coincide near 90% for oppo-site reasons that lie outside the intended operating regime: 

α = 0 fully mutes non-target patches and removes the scene context that the frozen backbone uses for peripheral behaviors (obstacle avoidance, gripper-table alignment, coarse workspace reasoning), while α = 1 is equivalent to disabling the injection altogether and reduces Premover to readiness-only. Performance is broadly stable across the interior range, indicating that calibration-based selection is itself robust and does not require fine-grained sweep-ing. We use α = 0 .2 as the default throughout the main experiments. 

## 5 Limitations and Future Work 

Focus map supervision relies on per-instance segmentation masks rendered by the simulator, which are not directly available on real-robot data. The most direct extension is to replace these masks with weak grounding signals from open-vocabulary detectors [ 12 ] or SAM-style mask predictors [ 9]; the floor scale ablation (Figure 5) indirectly suggests that the focus map operates within a finite tolerance with respect to mask quality, so a weaker but approximately correct signal on the named target should be enough to preserve the modulation behavior. Verifying this on real-robot data is the most natural next step. A related limitation is that the projection heads in this paper are trained per benchmark rather than once and transferred zero-shot. Each benchmark’s heads are trained on segmentation-supervised demonstrations from that benchmark, which means the recipe currently requires segmentation availability for every deployment domain rather than supporting cross-domain transfer of the heads themselves. Whether a single set of heads can be trained on a more diverse pool of segmentation-supervised data and then deployed across benchmarks is an open question we do not address here. Our experiments are restricted to π0.5, and to a single linear typing window per episode—no revisions, pauses, or multi-turn corrections. Extending Premover to other VLA backbones and to real keystroke traces is left to future work. In the latter, revisions and pauses introduce non-monotone prefix dynamics; we expect typing pauses themselves to provide an additional commitment signal that complements the readiness gate. 

## 6 Conclusion 

We introduced Premover , a lightweight frozen-backbone approach for acting on streaming prefixes in Vision-Language-Action models. Premover adds two jointly trained components to a frozen VLA backbone: a focus map that grounds the streaming prefix in the image, and a readiness gate that decides when to begin action. The focus map shapes where the policy attends, while the readiness gate determines when to act. On LIBERO, Premover reduces end-to-end wall-clock time by 13 .6% 

while matching the full-prompt baseline’s success rate. On VLA-arena, Premover reduces wall-clock time by 10 .3% with a 2.1%p success rate gap. Our main takeaway from Premover is that the user’s typing interval is a usable resource rather than dead time, and that much of what we want a VLA to do at inference can be captured by a lightweight module that modulates the frozen policy rather than retraining it. We hope Premover motivates future work that supervises where the policy attends and when it commits to action directly, rather than letting these emerge implicitly from action imitation. 9References 

[1] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, James Tanner, Quan Vuong, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, and Ury Zhilinsky. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 , 2024. [2] Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Manuel Y. Galliker, Dibya Ghosh, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Devin LeBlanc, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Allen Z. Ren, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Laura Smith, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Kyle Stachowicz, James Tanner, Quan Vuong, Homer Walke, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Lili Yu, and Ury Zhilinsky. π0.5: A vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054 , 2025. [3] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski, Tianli Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, Pete Florence, Chuyuan Fu, Montse Gonzalez Arenas, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Kehang Han, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Lisa Lee, Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Henryk Michalewski, Igor Mordatch, Karl Pertsch, Kanishka Rao, Krista Reymann, Michael Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi, Pierre Sermanet, Jaspiar Singh, Anikait Singh, Radu Soricut, Huong Tran, Vincent Vanhoucke, Quan Vuong, Ayzaan Wahid, Stefan Welker, Paul Wohlhart, Jialin Wu, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and Brianna Zitkovich. RT-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2023. [4] Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) ,2023. [5] Vivek Dhakal, Anna Maria Feit, Per Ola Kristensson, and Antti Oulasvirta. Observations on typing from 136 million keystrokes. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2018. doi: 10.1145/3173574.3174220. [6] Danny Driess, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Brian Ichter, Lili Yu, Adrian Li-Bell, Karl Pertsch, Allen Z. Ren, Homer Walke, Quan Vuong, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, and Sergey Levine. Knowledge insulating vision-language-action models: Train fast, run fast, generalize better. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2025. Spotlight. [7] Haifeng Huang, Xinyi Chen, Yilun Chen, Hao Li, Xiaoshen Han, Zehan Wang, Tai Wang, Jiangmiao Pang, and Zhou Zhao. RoboGround: Robotic manipulation with grounded vision-language priors. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 22540–22550, 2025. [8] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Thomas Kollar, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey Levine, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. OpenVLA: An open-source vision-language-action model. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2024. [9] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Segment anything. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2023. [10] Sangoh Lee, Sangwoo Mo, and Wook-Shin Han. Bring my cup! personalizing vision-language-action models with visual attentive prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.20014 , 2025. [11] Bo Liu, Yifeng Zhu, Chongkai Gao, Yihao Feng, Qiang Liu, Yuke Zhu, and Peter Stone. LIBERO: Bench-marking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2023. [12] Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Jie Yang, Qing Jiang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei Yang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, and Lei Zhang. Grounding DINO: Marrying DINO with grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , 2024. [13] Ziyan Liu, Yeqiu Chen, Hongyi Cai, Tao Lin, Shuo Yang, Zheng Liu, and Bo Zhao. VLA-Pruner: Temporal-aware dual-level visual token pruning for efficient vision-language-action inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16449 , 2025. 

10 [14] I. Scott MacKenzie. A note on calculating text entry speed, 2002. Research note, York University, 

https://www.yorku.ca/mack/RN-TextEntrySpeed.html .[15] NVIDIA, Johan Bjorck, Fernando Castañeda, Nikita Cherniadev, Xingye Da, Runyu Ding, Linxi Fan, Yu-Wei Fang, Dieter Fox, Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang, Joel Jang, Zhenyu Jiang, Jan Kautz, Kaushil Kundalia, Lawrence Lao, Zhiqi Li, Zongyu Lin, Kevin Lin, Guilin Liu, Edith Llontop, Loic Magne, Ajay Mandlekar, Avnish Narayan, Soroush Nasiriany, Scott Reed, You Liang Tan, Guanzhi Wang, Zu Wang, Jing Wang, Qi Wang, Jiannan Xiang, Yuqi Xie, Yinzhen Xu, Zhenjia Xu, Seonghyeon Ye, Zhiding Yu, Ao Zhang, Hao Zhang, Yizhou Zheng, and Ruijie Zhou. GR00T N1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14734 , 2025. [16] Karl Pertsch, Kyle Stachowicz, Brian Ichter, Danny Driess, Suraj Nair, Quan Vuong, Oier Mees, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. FAST: Efficient action tokenization for vision-language-action models. In 

Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2025. [17] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2021. [18] Mustafa Shukor, Dana Aubakirova, Francesco Capuano, Pepijn Kooijmans, Steven Palma, Adil Zouitine, Michel Aractingi, Caroline Pascal, Martino Russi, Andres Marafioti, Simon Alibert, Matthieu Cord, Thomas Wolf, and Remi Cadene. SmolVLA: A vision-language-action model for affordable and efficient robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01844 , 2025. [19] Wenxuan Song, Ziyang Zhou, Han Zhao, Jiayi Chen, Pengxiang Ding, Haodong Yan, Yuxin Huang, Feilong Tang, Donglin Wang, and Haoang Li. ReconVLA: Reconstructive vision-language-action model as effective robot perceiver. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10333 , 2025. [20] Junjie Wen, Yichen Zhu, Jinming Li, Minjie Zhu, Zhibin Tang, Kun Wu, Zhiyuan Xu, Ning Liu, Ran Cheng, Chaomin Shen, Yaxin Peng, Feifei Feng, and Jian Tang. TinyVLA: Toward fast, data-efficient vision-language-action models for robotic manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 10: 3988–3995, 2024. [21] Yang Yue, Bingyi Kang, Zhongwen Xu, Gao Huang, and Shuicheng Yan. DeeR-VLA: Dynamic inference of multimodal large language models for efficient robot execution. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. [22] Borong Zhang, Jiahao Li, Jiachen Shen, Yishuai Cai, Yuhao Zhang, Yuanpei Chen, Juntao Dai, Jiaming Ji, and Yaodong Yang. VLA-Arena: An open-source framework for benchmarking vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.22539 , 2025. [23] Zezhou Zhang, Songxin Zhang, Xiao Xiong, Junjie Zhang, Zejian Xie, Jingyi Xi, Zunyao Mao, Zan Mao, Zhixin Mai, Zhuoyang Song, and Jiaxing Zhang. PVI: Plug-in visual injection for vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.12772 , 2026. [24] Tony Z. Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual manipula-tion with low-cost hardware. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2023. [25] Jinliang Zheng, Jianxiong Li, Sijie Cheng, Yinan Zheng, Jiaming Li, Jihao Liu, Yu Liu, Jingjing Liu, and Xianyuan Zhan. Instruction-guided visual masking. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2024. 

## A Implementation Details 

Optimization. All trainable parameters are optimized with AdamW (learning rate 10 −4, weight decay 10 −4,gradient clipping at norm 1.0). The frozen backbone is held in bfloat16; the trainable parameters—projection heads fimg , flang , and readiness threshold τ —are kept in float32. Loss weights in Eq. (9) are λfocus = λready = 1 .0,the readiness temperature is T = 0 .10 , and the logit scale in Eq. (2) is fixed at s = 6 .0.

11 Training data. For each benchmark we train a separate set of projection heads on per-frame observations from expert demonstration rollouts, replayed in a segmentation-enabled environment to obtain instance-level masks. On LIBERO, all ten tasks (IDs 0–9) of each suite are used; for each task, demonstration episodes 0–9 are used for training the projection heads, episodes 10–14 form a calibration set for hyperparameter selection, and episodes 15–49 are reserved for evaluation rollouts. On VLA-arena, we use the four Level-1 task families defined by Zhang et al. [22] —Safety, Distractor, Extrapolation, and Long-horizon—comprising 55 tasks across 11 suites (5 tasks per suite). Following the benchmark’s split, we train the projection heads on demonstration episodes 0–7 (8 per task); we then apply the same calibration/evaluation convention as LIBERO, using the initial states of episodes 10–14 for calibration and 15–49 for evaluation. We do not transfer LIBERO-trained projection heads to VLA-arena: the VLA-arena results in §4.2 report performance of heads trained on VLA-arena demonstrations under the same recipe and hyperparameters as on LIBERO. For each sampled frame we additionally construct four streaming prefixes of the task instruction by word-level cumulative truncation (e.g., “pick”, “pick up”, . . . , “pick up the ketchup”), chosen deterministically to span short prefixes through the full instruction. Prefixes in which the target referent has not yet emerged are used for the readiness loss only and are excluded from the focus map supervision (§3.2). 

Hyperparameter selection. The floor scale α in Eq. (4) is selected on episodes 10–14 of each LIBERO task (5 episodes per task) by sweeping α over a discrete grid and choosing the value with the highest mean success: α = 0 .2 for π0.5. The selected value is then applied to the full LIBERO evaluation (episodes 15–49) reported in Table 1, and reused on VLA-arena without further tuning. Fig. 5 additionally reports the α sweep on the full LIBERO evaluation set (episodes 15–49) for π0.5, showing that the selected α = 0 .2 lies well within the plateau of the resulting curve. 

Evaluation rollouts. The evaluation set comprises 35 rollouts per task ( 350 per LIBERO suite, 1400 total across the four suites), with the same initial-state seeds across the three settings (full-prompt, naive premoving, Premover) so that the action-start rule is the only source of variation. 

Computing Resources. All experiments were conducted on 8 NVIDIA H200 GPUs (141 GB each). Each set of projection heads was trained on a single GPU; evaluation rollouts were parallelized across the remaining GPUs. 

## B Focus Map Aggregation and Choice of K 

LIBERO and VLA-arena both provide two camera views per timestep: a fixed agent-mounted view and a wrist-mounted view that moves with the end effector. We apply the image projection head fimg in §3.1 to each view independently, producing per-view focus maps p(agent ) 

> t

, p (wrist ) 

> t

∈ [0 , 1] N . We then average the two maps elementwise: 

pt,i = 12



p(agent ) 

> t,i

+ p(wrist )

> t,i



, i = 1 , . . . , N. (10) The resulting pt is used for both next-step input reweighting (§3.1) and the readiness score (§3.2). Averaging preserves the interpretation of pt,i as a per-patch probability and avoids making the readiness score overly sensitive to a single view, especially early in an episode when the wrist camera may not yet observe the target. The readiness score in Eq. 6 computes a top-K mean of pt before subtracting the global mean. We choose K

using a small sweep on LIBERO episodes 10–14 with π0.5, holding all other hyperparameters fixed. As shown in Table 4, K = 10 matches the highest observed success rate ( 88 .0% , tied with K = 120 ) while giving lower wall-clock time than the other best-performing setting ( 43 .8 s vs. 44 .3 s). Although K = 30 gives a slightly lower wall-clock time, it reduces success to 84 .0% . Larger values eventually dilute the local focus statistic, with success degrading sharply for K ≥ 150 . We therefore use K = 10 throughout the main experiments. 

## C Qualitative Focus Map Examples 

Figure 6 shows the visualization of focus maps from each LIBERO suite once the prefix has revealed the target referent. For visualization clarity, we display only focus-map probabilities exceeding 0.8; this threshold is applied solely for visualization. Beyond literal instance-mask boundaries, the focus map frequently extends to immediately adjacent affordance regions. This is a noteworthy departure from what focus map supervision strictly asks for: the loss in Eq. 3 pushes the focus map to match a binary instance mask, but the projection heads consistently learn to assign substantial probability ( ≥ 0.8) to functionally related regions outside the supervised support. 

12 Figure 6: Qualitative focus maps on LIBERO. Per suite (rows): RGB observation, focus-map overlay (probability ≥ 0.8), and target instance mask. Above-threshold patches localize the target and frequently extend onto adjacent affordance regions (handles, lids, contact surfaces). 

Figure 7: Qualitative focus maps on VLA-arena. Same layout and threshold as Fig. 6; the affordance-extension pattern persists under VLA-arena’s distribution shift. 

## D Streaming Setting 

Prefix generation. We adopt a streaming rollout protocol in which prompt tokens are revealed to the policy on a wall-clock schedule synchronized with measured per-step inference latency, calibrated to a reference typing rate of 52 .24 WPM [5]. 

Why a fixed WPM. We use the average typing speed of 52 .24 WPM reported by Dhakal et al. [5] as a fixed point estimate, rather than sampling per-rollout typing speeds, so that latency comparisons isolate the effect of 

13 Table 4: Sweep over K for the readiness score. Results are measured on LIBERO episodes 10–14 with π0.5 (n = 50 ), holding all other hyperparameters fixed. K = 10 matches the highest observed success rate while giving the best wall-clock time among the best-performing settings. Large K

values dilute the top-K focus statistic; in this sweep, performance degrades sharply once K ≥ 150 .                      

> KSuccess (%) ↑Wall (s/ep) ↓
> 10 88.0 43.8 30 84.0 43.4
> 60 86.0 43.9 90 86.0 44.1 120 88.0 44.3 150 74.0 49.8 180 40.0 63.0 210 6.0 77.4 256 0.0 78.4

the readiness gate from variation in the typing-speed distribution. Following the standard 5-characters-per-word convention for WPM [ 14 ], this rate corresponds to 52 .24 × 5/60 ≈ 4.35 characters per second. With Gemma’s tokenizer averaging approximately 4 characters per token and our policy loop running at approximately 13 Hz, this gives (4 /4.35) × 13 ≈ 11 .9 simulator steps per token, which we round to a fixed reveal schedule of 12 simulator steps per token . Thus, each new token in the streaming prefix is exposed after exactly 12 simulator steps for all episodes and methods, ensuring identical streaming dynamics across comparisons. End-to-end wall-clock times, which underlie our speedup metrics, are measured from the first revealed token to the simulator-reported terminal state, and therefore include both the input interval during which only partial prefixes are visible and the subsequent policy execution. 

## E Qualitative Streaming Rollout Example 

Figure 8 visualizes four rollouts under the two protocols on LIBERO and VLA-arena. Both rows share a common time axis aligned to the start of user typing. Under the Default protocol (top row), the policy waits idle through the full typing window and only begins acting once the prompt has been fully revealed; the rollout finishes at ∼ 10 .6 s. Under Premover (bottom row), the readiness gate commits early so the policy begins executing while the user is still typing. Premover completes the same task at ∼ 6.5 s, 4.1 s before Default, despite both policies sharing the identical backbone weights and observation stream. The green overlay on the Premover frames shows the focus map at probability ≥ 0.8

(visualization threshold; cf. App. C). 

## F Focus Map Overhead 

Parameter and compute cost. The focus head consists of two lightweight projection heads ( fimg and flang )with 2.36 M parameters in total—a small addition to the frozen π0.5 backbone. Their inference cost is similarly negligible. On LIBERO, the focus head adds 0.232 ms per inference step over an average backbone forward time of 65 .84 ms ( 0.35% of backbone cost). Across the average 258 .55 inference steps per episode, this amounts to approximately 0.06 s of additional compute, or 0.18% of the 33 .92 s full-instruction interaction time. On VLA-arena, the focus head adds 0.239 ms per step over a 65 .98 ms backbone forward pass, again 0.36% of the backbone cost. Across ∼ 470 inference steps per episode, this amounts to approximately 0.11 s, or 0.13% of the 85 .39 s full-prompt interaction time. Thus, the observed wall-time reductions are obtained with negligible additional compute and parameters. 

14 LIBERO / Object / Task 4 

Default 

Premover       

> 0s 2s 4s 6s 8s 10s 12s
> LIBERO / Spatial / Task 0

Default 

Premover       

> 0s 2s 4s 6s 8s 10s 12s
> VLA-Arena / Safety / Task 0

Default 

Premover       

> 0s 2s 4s 6s 8s 10s 12s
> VLA-Arena / Distractor / Task 1

Default 

Premover       

> 0s 2s 4s 6s 8s 10s 12s

-4.5s 

-4.1s 

-3.8s 

-5.2s Figure 8: Streaming rollouts on LIBERO and VLA-arena. Default vs. Premover on a shared time axis aligned to the start of typing. Default idles through the typing window; Premover commits early via the readiness gate and finishes earlier. Green overlay shows focus-map patches with probability 

≥ 0.8 (cf. App. C). 15