Title: Flow Control: Steering Vision-Language-Action Models with Simple Real-Time Inputs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.10180v1

Published Time: Wed, 10 Jun 2026 00:22:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Flow Control: Steering Vision–Language–Action Models with Simple Real-Time Inputs 

Jonathan C. Kao 

Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Computer Science, and Neurobiology, University of California, Los Angeles 

kao@seas.ucla.edu 

Jason Chan 

Department of Computer Science University of California, Los Angeles 

jasontchan@ucla.edu 

Andy Wang 

Department of Computer Science University of California, Los Angeles 

andywang0321@ucla.edu 

Abstract: 

We introduce flow control of vision-language-action (VLA) models, a simple and effective way to steer VLA actions in real-time through generic inputs, such as a keyboard. This method can be used out-of-the-box and does not require retrain-ing or fine-tuning VLAs. It enables relatively crude user inputs to steer a VLA to align with user intent. The VLA transforms these inputs into action samples drawn from the VLA expert action distribution learned during training, so that the generated actions are high quality (conformity to the action expert distribution) and high fidelity (reflecting the user’s intent). We demonstrate that flow control has many desirable properties: (1) flow control accurately and responsively steers robot actions with user inputs, (2) it is robust to suboptimal user inputs, (3) it en-ables users to steer VLAs to achieve significantly higher success rates and faster task completion, and (4) fine-tuning a VLA on flow control trajectories improves the autonomous policy. Together, these results provide a simple and intuitive way for users to help steer VLA actions, increasing task performance. 

Keywords: Vision-Language-Action Models, Policy Steering, Flow Matching 

# 1 Introduction 

VLAs map camera observations and natural language commands to robot actions, achieving state-of-the-art performance on many tasks [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. But VLAs also remain unreliable in many ways: they may follow language poorly [9, 10, 8, 11], fail to generalize to novel objects and scenes [2, 7], and, like many imitation-learning based policies, drift into out-of-distribution (OOD) states where recovery is challenging [12]. These shortcomings motivate providing users a way to steer VLAs as they act. Existing approaches use language through mid-episode corrections or hierarchical commands [13, 14, 8], as well as trajectory sketches and goal images [11, 15, 8] to help steer VLA actions. But language corrections are coarse and intermittent, while sketches and goal images require high-bandwidth. These steering methods furthermore involve additional data collection and fine-tuning. In this work, we aim to address these limitations by enabling users to steer VLA actions in real-time, providing low-bandwidth but precise adjustments and/or corrections. We also aim to achieve this steering without additional policy training, so that VLAs can be steered out-of-the-box. Finally, we also aim for this steering interface to be intuitive and simple , not requiring significant user learning as in teleoperation. This goal is summarized in Figure 1, where simple and generic user inputs (in 

> arXiv:2606.10180v1 [cs.RO] 8 Jun 2026

this study, keyboard inputs), can be injected into a frozen VLA (in this study, π0.5) to steer VLA robot actions without any retraining.   

> Figure 1: Overview .We freeze a VLA with a flow matching action expert. Our method (red) steers the VLA by injecting user inputs into an action expert.

A critical observation we leverage is that sev-eral state-of-the-art VLAs use generative action experts, such as a flow matching head in π0.5

[2]. These generative policies transform noise – conditioned on camera inputs, language, state, and attention tokens derived from these inputs – into continuous actions [16, 17, 1, 2]. We call the distribution of these continuous actions the “action expert distribution.” In this work, we enable users to provide relatively crude steering inputs through a keyboard, such as {up, down, left, right, forward, backward } (see Figure 1). On their own, these inputs would be too coarse to provide precise and intuitive steering of high degree-of-freedom (DOF) robots. However, by us-ing the VLA’s generative action expert, we show it is possible for the VLA to transform these crude user inputs into high quality on-policy samples from the action expert distribution. Our main contribution is flow control , a method that injects user intent to steer VLAs so that gener-ated actions are high quality (sampled from the action expert distribution) and high fidelity (conform-ing to the user’s intent). Flow control does not require any data labeling, retraining, or fine-tuning and can be used out-of-the-box with VLAs using flow matching action experts. In a user study with 

16 participants, we demonstrate that when users steer zero-shot π0.5-DROID with simple keyboard inputs, task success rate and speed of completion significantly increase. Finally, as flow control steering generates actions that are on policy , we show that fine-tuning π0.5 on flow control trajecto-ries results in significantly higher autonomous policy performance. We anticipate this method gives users responsive and precise steering over VLAs out-of-the-box. Beyond improving task outcomes for robot policies, we also anticipate that this approach may have significant impact on assistive robotics, such as brain-computer interfaces, where low-dimensional user inputs can be translated into high DOF robot actions. 

# 2 Related Works 

Steering robot policies through language, vision, and traces. Prior work lets users or high-level modules steer robot policies, differing in the modality of the steering signal and whether it requires retraining. One common channel is language: hierarchical VLAs decompose tasks into language subtasks a user can issue or correct mid-episode [14, 13], and a body of work incorporates free-form verbal corrections during execution [18, 19, 20, 21], with some studies explicitly quantifying and improving a policy’s responsiveness to language [9]. Another method of steering uses spatial or visual goals: hand-drawn 2D trajectories [22, 23], editable trajectory traces [11], and generated or user-provided subgoal images [24, 15, 8]. While these interfaces are expressive, they are also coarse, intermittent semantic commands (language) or high-bandwidth spatial input (sketches, goal images). Further, these methods often involve additional training to enable the policy to process a particular signal, typically with purpose-collected data. In contrast, flow control does not use language or goals; rather, users provide intuitive and simple keyboard inputs in real-time. Further, flow control requires no additional data collection or training. 

Inference-time steering of generative policies. More related to our work are methods that steer a frozen diffusion or flow policy at inference. Several guide the sampling process. Inference-Time Policy Steering (ITPS) [25] biases sampling to align generated actions with objectives such as reach-ing a point, matching a sketch, or physically correcting an action, computing the gradient of these objectives with respect to the noise and partially stepping along it. DynaGuide [26] similarly guides diffusion sampling with the gradient of a metric from a learned dynamics model. DemoDiffusion 2[27] retargets a single human demonstration into a rough trajectory that a pretrained policy then refines. Each steers the policy through its stochastic denoising process—via objective gradients [25, 26] or a retargeted demonstration prior [27]. Because we target VLAs with flow-matching ac-tion experts, which integrate a deterministic ODE rather than the stochastic differential equation (SDE) used in diffusion, we find that flow control is significantly simpler. As we detail in the Meth-ods, in flow control, we find that simply modifying the initial condition of the flow ODE is sufficient to align the VLA with user intent, requiring no additional guidance gradients. 

Steering via the initial condition. As flow control steers via initial condition, another related work is diffusion steering through reinforcement learning (DSRL) [28], which also acts on the initial noise rather than guiding the denoising process. DSRL trains an RL policy πW (s) that replaces the initial-noise distribution x0 ∼ N (0 , I) with x0 ∼ πW (s), steering the policy from a learned, favorable initial condition. Our method differs in its simplicity: we do not learn a distribution over initial conditions, but set the initial condition directly to a desired action. The flow matching head then transforms this into an on policy action sampled from the action expert distribution, requiring no additional learning of an RL policy. 

Shared autonomy with diffusion policy. Prior studies implemented shared autonomy using a dif-fusion model [29, 30] as a way to transform user actions into robot actions. In diffusion-based policies, unit Gaussian noise x0 ∼ N (0 , I) is reverse diffused to a sample from the action expert distribution, x1 ∼ pexpert . These prior methods forward diffuse a user action u by the proportion 

0 ≤ γ ≤ 1, treating this forward diffused user action as x1−γ [29, 30]. Reverse diffusion is then applied to x1−γ , with optional inpainting [30], to generate an action sample x1. As γ → 1, the user action is forward diffused to unit Gaussian noise, losing the user’s initial intent u. This leads the sampled action x1 to have low fidelity with the user’s intent, but high conformity to the action dis-tribution pexpert . In contrast, as γ → 0, the action has high fidelity , but with fewer reverse diffusion steps, x1 is relatively further from the manifold of pexpert , resulting in low conformity to the expert actions. Correctly tuning this hyperparameter γ is critical. In contrast to these methods, flow control avoids this hyperparameter entirely. Because we inject the user’s action in the initial condition, we also do not incur additional latency to forward- then reverse-diffuse the user’s action. Finally, flow control actions can be relatively crude because the user action u is fully integrated through the flow matching ODE, so that x1 ∼ pexpert , achieving both high fidelity and high conformity. 

# 3 Methods 

3.1 Vision–language–action models 

VLAs fine-tune pre-trained vision language models (VLMs) for robot control, endowing robots with priors learned from large-scale vision and text pre-training [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. In this study, we use the π0.5 VLA [2], which fine tunes the PaliGemma VLM [31] on robot state and action chunks. π0.5

generates actions with a flow matching action expert, implemented by a downsized 300 M-parameter Gemma transformer [32]. This action expert attends to VLM tokens for camera observations, the language prompt, and the robot state, as well as its own action expert embeddings. Conditioned on these tokens, the action expert integrates a flow-matching ODE, so the generated actions depend on visual, language, and proprioceptive inputs. We use the VLA π0.5-DROID, which was fine-tuned on the DROID dataset [33]. 

3.2 Background on flow matching and diffusion 

A flow matching model is defined according to an ordinary differential equation (ODE), specified by a vector field vt(x) satisfying dxt = vt(xt)dt , with initial condition (IC) x0 ∼ N (0 , I) at t = 0 .A flow matching model learns a neural network representation, vθt (x) that minimizes the squared error to a target vector field, L(θ) = vθt (xt) − vtarget  

> t

(xt) 2, and in practice, including for VLAs, it is common to define vtarget  

> t

(xt) = x1 − x0. The action x1 can be computed by integrating the 3ODE, 

x1 = x0 +

Z 10

vθt (xt)dt. (1) We perform this integration using the Euler method over 1/∆t time steps, iteratively computing 

xt+∆ t = xt + vθt (xt)∆ t (2) to transform a sample of unit Gaussian noise, x0 ∼ N (0, I) into a robot action x1 ∼ pexpert . In 

π0.5, ∆t = 0 .1, meaning the Euler integration takes 10 steps for inference.    

> Figure 2: a , Diffusion injects noise at each time step, and therefore information in the initial condition (IC) is lost over successive iterations. b, Flow matching is a diffeomorphism and is therefore invertible, preserving information about the IC in x1.c, The flow trajectory integrates an ODE directly to the left mode; diffusion integrates a noisy SDE that can arrive at the right mode.

In contrast, a diffusion model is defined accord-ing to a stochastic differential equation (SDE), where dxt = vt(xt)dt + σtdWt, and Wt

is a stochastic Wiener process. In a diffusion model, noise is therefore added in the reverse diffusion process at each time-step. In prac-tice, this SDE can be integrated using the Euler-Maruyama method, which iteratively computes 

xt+∆ t = xt + vθt (xt)∆ t + √∆tσ tϵt, (3) where ϵt ∼ N (0 , I). This Markov chain is shown in Figure 2a. Empirically, diffusion models typically use significantly more steps to converge to a sample x1 ∼ pexpert . A key dif-ference between flow matching and diffusion models is that diffusion models have noise injected at every iteration from x0 to x1, where as flow matching models take a deterministic path from x0 to 

x1 (compare Figure 2a and b). This is conceptually illustrated in Figure 2c, where the diffusion path has additive noise but the flow path does not. 

3.3 Initial condition information in diffusion and flow matching Diffusion loses initial condition information. Reverse diffusion forms a Markov chain x0 →

x∆t → · · · → x1 given the conditioning c (camera, state, language), with each Euler–Maruyama step adding independent noise. Applying the data processing inequality [34] to the sub-chain 

xk∆t → x(k+1)∆ t → · · · → x1 yields, for every k,

I(xk∆t; x1 | c) < I  x(k+1)∆ t; x1 | c , (4) with the inequality being strict because the injected noise is non-degenerate. Thus the mutual in-formation with the final action is smallest at x0 and grows monotonically toward x1. Intuitively, this means that information placed in the IC x0 is progressively washed out. As Yoneda et al. [29] observe, a user action injected near x0 therefore results in a low fidelity action (not reflecting user input). 

Flow matching preserves initial condition information. We assume the learned velocity field 

vθt (· | c) : Rd × [0 , 1] → Rd is continuously differentiable and L-Lipschitz in x, uniformly in 

t ∈ [0 , 1] . This assumption holds for the smooth networks used in practice, and results in a flow ψt

that maps x0 to xt that is a diffeomorphism for every t [35, 36]. Consequently xt and x1 are related, given c, by the deterministic bijection xt = ψt

 ψ−11 (x1); in particular the IC is fully recoverable, 

x0 = ψ−11 (x1). The data processing inequality therefore holds with equality, 

I(xk∆t; x1 | c) = I x(k+1)∆ t; x1 | c for all k, (5) in contrast to the strict decay of (4). Flow matching therefore preserves information about the IC x0

in the eventual action x1.Beyond preserving information, we hypothesize that the determinism of the flow makes the initial condition a usable control input. Because the flow integrates a bounded velocity field, it transports 4a point only a limited distance: setting x0 = xuser , the generated action x1 = ψ1(xuser ) satisfies 

∥x1 − xuser ∥ ≤ R 10 ∥vθt (xt)∥ dt , so x1 stays relatively close to the injected user action xuser (high fidelity to the user input). At the same time, x1 ∼ pexpert so long as xuser is reasonably probable under N (0, I), which for π0.5 is typically the case: robot actions are normalized for the action expert. Because of this, we intuit that when there are two possible action modes, initial conditions that are closer to a particular mode are more likely to converge to them (Figure 2, green trajectory). This is because, although flow ODEs do not typically converge to dynamical systems with stable fixed points per se , there is strong flow to high-density regions of pexpert , which like fixed points therefore exhibit basins-of-attraction behavior (for more details, see Appendix A). In contrast, with diffusion, because noise is added at every time step, it is possible for the IC to be integrated along a noisy path towards another mode (Figure 2c, orange trajectory). We use the fact that flow matching models preserve information about the initial condition to motivate modifying the initial condition 

of the flow model for user control of VLAs. 

3.4 Our contribution: flow control of VLAs Algorithm 1: Flow control                                              

> Require: VLA with flow matching expert
> vθt; ODE steps K; chunk length τ
> 1: loop
> 2: observe c(camera, language, state) 3: vuser ←user keyboard input 4: xuser ←IK( vuser )
> 5: sample x0∼ N (0,I)
> 6: x0[0 : τ]←normalize (xuser [0 : τ])
> 7: for k= 0 , . . . , K −1do
> 8: xk+1 ←xk+ ∆ tvθtk(xk|c)
> 9: end for
> 10: execute action chunk x1on robot 11: end loop

We propose a simple way to achieve continuous user con-trol of VLAs: we modify the initial condition of the flow ODE with a user input. In this work, the user input u

comes from a keyboard action that reflects one of six directions: up, down, left, right, forward, or backward. These inputs are then translated into a 3D Cartesian end effector velocity in the direction of the pressed arrow key, 

vuser . We then perform inverse kinematics (IK) to com-pute robot joint velocities, xuser = IK (vuser ). In general, 

xuser is out-of-distribution of the VLA’s action expert dis-tribution, pexpert . Motivated by Section 3.3, in flow con-trol we set x0 = xuser , so that the flow matching action expert iteratively transforms x0 = xuser into a sample x1 ∼ pexpert that still contains information about user inputs while being a sample from the action expert distribution (see Algorithm 1). We emphasize that flow control steering: (1) does not require any additional training of a VLA, (2) provides a simple and intuitive way to real-time steer a VLA, (3) adds minimal inference latency to the VLA, (4) and generates on policy actions. 

3.5 Embodiment, tasks, and user study Embodiment : All tasks are performed using a Franka Panda robot arm, with one scene camera (ZED) and one wrist camera (ZED Mini) as in DROID [33]. We used the π0.5 VLA (specifically fine-tuned on DROID, called π0.5-DROID) in experiments because it is a state-of-the-art VLA and uses a flow matching action expert [2], although flow control can be used with any VLA with a flow matching action expert. At each step of inference, π0.5-DROID produces an action chunk of 16 

time steps, although only 8 of these 16 actions are executed in the environment. At each time step, an action is 8-dimensional, comprising the 7 joint angles of the Franka Panda arm and the gripper width. All inference was performed on a single GPU (NVIDIA GeForce RTX 5090). We provide descriptions of each task and experiment in the relevant section of the experiments. 

Tasks : We perform four tasks across the study. Full descriptions are in Appendix B.1. 1. Two-block pick-and-place (Section 4.1, 4.2, Figure 3a): Two blocks are placed on a table with a square hole. The policy receives the ambiguous command “put the block in the hole.” A programmed steering command influences which block is placed. This is our simplest task and we perform flow control only on joint 1 of the manipulator for interpretability. All other tasks use flow control on all joint angles of the Franka arm. 2. Five-Block pick-and-place (Appendix C, Figure 6a): Five block goals are positioned at varying proximity. The policy receives the ambiguous command “put the block in the 5Figure 3: a , Task, “put the block in the hole.” 2 cm blocks are equally spaced 10 cm apart from the hole. b,Joint 1 controls left-right movement. c, We perturb joint 1’s initial condition from between τ = 0 to τ = 8         

> time steps over the horizon of 16 time steps in the π0.5action chunk. d, As τincreases, the proportion of left trials increases. e, Perturbing the IC does not adversely affect pick or place performance on the task.

hole.” This task enables us to characterize the resolution of flow control as well as methods to improve resolution of flow control by allowing partially OOD actions. 3. Marker-in-Bowl (Section 4.3, Figure 5a): Three different colored markers are spaced 

10 cm apart in front of a bowl. The language command is unambiguous: “put the red marker in the bowl.” π0.5-DROID was steered by a user to perform the task. 4. Cup-Stacking (Section 4.3, 4.4, Figure 5b): Three cups are placed on a table, and the policy must stack the cups in any order. The language command is unambiguous: “stack the cups.” π0.5-DROID was steered by a user to perform the task. 

User study : All experiments were approved by the UCLA IRB. We performed a user study with 16 users. Each user performed 10 trials of Marker-In-Bowl and 10 trials of Cup-Stacking, providing keyboard inputs to steer π0.5-DROID. Users were given the option to practice for at most 5 trials with flow control. In addition to this, users also teleoperated the Franka panda robot arm to perform an additional 10 trials of Marker-In-Bowl and Cup-Stacking. The teleoperation device was the Meta Quest 2, used as part of the DROID system [33]. 

# 4 Experiments 

We first empirically assess if injecting user intent through the flow IC is sufficient to steer the VLA policy in a simple setting where flow control is applied to only one joint. This enables us to also analyze if flow control steering is on policy. We subsequently perform a user study to show that when users steer π0.5-DROID with flow control, performance significantly increases. We further demonstrate that fine-tuning π0.5 with flow control trajectories increases autonomous performance. 

4.1 VLAs can be steered by modifying the flow IC. 

Using the Two-Block task (Figure 3a), we provide π0.5 the ambiguous language instruction “put the block in the hole.” π0.5 autonomously picks the right block 85% of the time. Our goal was to programmatically inject flow control ICs and determine under what settings, if any, modifying the IC could steer the autonomous policy to pick up the left block instead of the right block. For interpretability, we made this steering intentionally simple: since the blocks are positioned on the left-to-right axis, we only perturbed joint 1 of the Franka arm (controlling left to right movement, Figure 3b). To remove any user variability, we applied this steering signal at every timestep . Please note that all future experiments perform flow control on all robot arm joints. To steer π0.5 towards the left block, we perturbed the joint 1 IC via x[joint 1 ]0 ← x[joint 1 ]0 −σ with σ = 1 

(“add”) or x[joint 1 ]0 = −σ (“set”). However, because π0.5 generates an action chunk, there are initial conditions at T = 16 times in the action chunk (Figure 3c, with π0.5 having action horizon T = 16 ). We systematically varied the number of action chunks with perturbed IC for τ ∈ { 2, 4, 6, 8}. As τ

increased we saw the steering command was more effective, eventually acquiring the left block on nearly 100% of trials (“set”, τ = 6 and τ = 8 , Figure 3d; we use “set” for the rest of the paper). Finally, we observed that steering the VLA directionally did not adversely affect the VLA’s other 6actions, including picking and placing blocks (Figure 3e). Setting the initial condition of the flow action expert therefore predictably steered the VLA policy towards an intended goal. 

4.2 Flow control produces on policy VLA actions. 

We emphasize that for the Two-Block steering experiment, we applied the joint-1 perturbation at every timestep, yet perturbed trials still completed the pick, transport, and place sub-tasks at nearly 

100% success (Figure 3e). After picking up the left block, the task is unambiguous: the arm must move to the right to place the block in the hole. The policy’s action expert distribution can therefore be thought of as unimodal during these unambiguous sub-tasks, meaning on policy actions specify a single trajectory. When the arm moved the block towards the hole, the flow control steering signal was still being applied, and critically was discordant with the on policy action. Even so, the flow matching head transformed these discordant steering signals into on policy actions that did not detrimentally affect task completion.   

> Figure 4: a , In a multimodal setting, flow control steers the policy towards the left block. b, c , In a unimodal setting, the flow IC is transformed into an on policy ac-tion. d, In experiments, the IC perturbation only affects the trajectory early (red) and not when the task is un-ambiguous (black and blue).

Flow control steering can therefore be thought of as injecting user intent when action distri-butions are multimodal, and there are multi-ple potential options (which block to pick, Fig-ure 4a). However, when the on policy action is unimodal, flow control does not interfere with generating on policy actions. One intuition is that the flow IC is driven by a strong flow to-wards a unimodal distribution (illustration in Figure 4b, c). Consistent with this, when we empirically measured the effect of the flow con-trol IC perturbation on the VLA’s actions, we found the flow IC was influential before the pol-icy picked one of the two blocks, but not so when flow control steering would impede un-ambiguous task completion. This is illustrated in Figure 4d, where we plot 10 trajectories of flow control steering with τ = 8 . Red in the trajectory indicates high alignment of the VLA action with the flow IC, while blue indicates that the VLA action was discordant with the flow IC. We therefore emphasize that perturbing the flow IC is not simply adding a joint bias for all move-ments. When flow control steering injects user inputs that would negatively impact task completion, the flow matching action expert transforms discordant user input into harmonious on policy actions. In other words, the flow IC only steers the policy when it matters. This raises a secondary question: what if the user wanted to steer the policy away from the VLA’s unimodal action expert distribution? For example, two blocks may be in close proximity, and the policy may generate a unimodal action distribution to pick one block while the user wishes to pick another block. In this case, it is possible to generate partially OOD actions by also perturbing the flow process. We detail a sequence of three additional experiments to address this, using a Five-Block pick-and-place task where flow control was performed on all joint angles in Appendix C. Summarily, we find that if users wanted to generate actions that are OOD of the action expert distri-bution, it is possible to do so by injecting the user action into ODE integration. 

4.3 Flow control steering significantly increases VLA performance. 

We next performed a user study to assess if flow control could steer VLAs to achieve better task performance. We performed two tasks using n = 16 participants. In the Marker-in-Bowl task, where the VLA was unambiguously prompted to “put the red marker in the bowl,” (Figure 5a) π0.5-DROID demonstrated poor language following: while it always placed a marker in the bowl, it was the correct marker on only 53 .3% of trials. In this case, users steered the policy with keyboard inputs to correct incorrect language following, increasing the success rate of picking the right marker 7Figure 5: a , Marker-in-Bowl task. b, Cup-Stacking task. c, Example failure of π0.5-DROID, not lifting a cup high enough and knocking over another. d, The user gives a flow control input “up” to avoid this failure. e,Trial time distribution for Cup-Stacking for autonomous, flow control, and flow control fine tuned VLA. 

to 99 .4% (Table 1, p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon rank sum). In this task, autonomous and flow control execution was fast, with flow control being 8.3% faster ( p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon rank sum). Flow control steering therefore enabled users to overcome incorrect language following, substantially increasing task success rate. In the Cup-Stacking task, the VLA was prompted to stack 3 cups (Figure 5b). This task was rel-atively long horizon and more challenging than prior tasks. We found π0.5-DROID was able to perform this task successfully 48 .0% of the time, with a common failure mode being that the policy knocked over cups while trying to stack them (Figure 5c). On successful trials, π0.5-DROID’s aver-age trial time was 50 .33 seconds. When users steered the policy with flow control, the success rate increased significantly to 87 .7% (p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon rank sum). Users frequently corrected the policy, for example, when the robot arm might try to stack the cups without gripping a held cup high enough (Figure 5d). When flow control steering, users significantly decreased the average trial time to 35 .21 seconds, which was 30% faster ( p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon rank sum, Table 1 and Figure 5e).             

> Autonomous FC
> Success rate (↑)Marker 53.3% 99.4%
> Stack 48.0% 87.7%
> Trial time [s] ( ↓)Marker 14.50 13.30
> Stack 50.33 35.21 Table 1: Performance of autonomous vs flow control (FC) steering.

We also assessed if flow control steering could help some users perform the task faster than teleoperation, which can be chal-lenging to master (Appendix D). Summarily, we found that the across user spread in completion time was 32 × (2.8×)less for Marker-in-Bowl (Cup-Stacking) in flow control than teleop. Flow control therefore equalized performance across operators, with naive teleoperators performing the Marker-in-Bowl (Cup-Stacking) task 46 .4% (17 .9% ) faster with FC (Ap-pendix D). 

4.4 Fine-tuning π0.5 on flow control steering trajectories improves VLA performance 

Flow control actions are on policy (Section 4.2), and therefore provide in-distribution action tra-jectories – with corrections – that can be used to improve the policy. We fine-tuned π0.5-DROID with 60 successful flow control trials, which we call π0.5-FC. π0.5-FC achieved 100% success rate on the stack the cups task (compared to 48% for π0.5-DROID), and decreased the mean trial time to 22 seconds (Figure 5e). Flow control therefore not only provides the ability for users to steer VLA trajectories in real-time, but yields on-policy data that durably improves the underlying policy. Because flow-control trajectories are also collected with simple inputs rather than full teleoperation, reducing across-trial variance (Appendix D), they may be cheaper to gather at scale. 

# 5 Discussion 

We demonstrate that, after setting the initial condition of the flow matching expert to be the user action, it is possible for users to steer VLAs to improve task success and speed. This flow control steering can be used zero-shot with VLAs that use a flow matching action expert, and does not re-quire any fine-tuning. Further, we demonstrate in experiments that flow control steering produces on policy actions, and that these trajectories can further fine-tune VLAs to improve autonomous perfor-mance. Flow control also enables naive teleoperators to achieve significantly faster task completion 8times, and can therefore be viewed as a form of shared autonomy. As flow control provides simple, intuitive, and real-time steering of VLAs through keyboard inputs, we anticipate this method may help to correct and adjust robot actions when autonomous policies perform suboptimally. 

5.1 Limitations 

While we believe a benefit of flow control is that it produces on policy actions, this could also be viewed as a limitation. For example, if the VLA “commits” to a certain task goal, user inputs will have little impact on robot actions. While we partially addressed this by perturbing the flow process in Appendix C, we by no means suggest this is an optimal way to address this limitation. Future work may therefore investigate how to more effectively sample OOD actions. A further limitation is that our work only applies to using VLAs that have a flow matching action expert. VLAs with diffusion action experts may adopt steering methods from the shared autonomy literature [29, 30]. This method, however, does not apply to VLAs that autoregressively generate discrete action tokens. 

# Author contributions 

J.C.K. conceived and implemented flow control, conducted the experiments and user study, per-formed the analyses, generated the figures, and wrote the paper. J.C. wrote code to operate the robotic arm. J.C. and A.W. participated in paper review. 

# Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by NIH DP1HD121548, DP2NS122037, and the UCLA-Amazon Science Hub award (all to J.C.K). 

# Competing Interests 

J.C.K. is the inventor of intellectual property owned by Stanford University that has been licensed to Blackrock Neurotech and Neuralink Corp. J.C.K. has a provisional patent application related to AI copilots for brain–computer interfaces that is owned by the Regents of the University of California. J.C.K. is a co-founder of Luke, is on its Board of Directors and has a financial interest in it. The other authors declare no competing interests. 9References 

[1] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, L. Groom, K. Haus-man, B. Ichter, S. Jakubczak, T. Jones, L. Ke, S. Levine, A. Li-Bell, M. Mothukuri, S. Nair, K. Pertsch, L. X. Shi, J. Tanner, Q. Vuong, A. Walling, H. Wang, and U. Zhilinsky. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. arXiv [cs.LG] , Oct. 2024. [2] P. Intelligence, K. Black, N. Brown, J. Darpinian, K. Dhabalia, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, M. Y. Galliker, D. Ghosh, L. Groom, K. Hausman, B. Ichter, S. Jakubczak, T. Jones, L. Ke, D. LeBlanc, S. Levine, A. Li-Bell, M. Mothukuri, S. Nair, K. Pertsch, A. Z. Ren, L. X. Shi, L. Smith, J. T. Springenberg, K. Stachowicz, J. Tanner, Q. Vuong, H. Walke, A. Walling, H. Wang, L. Yu, and U. Zhilinsky. π0.5: A vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. arXiv [cs.LG] , Apr. 2025. [3] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, X. Chen, K. Choromanski, T. Ding, D. Driess, A. Dubey, C. Finn, P. Florence, C. Fu, M. G. Arenas, K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Han, K. Hausman, A. Herzog, J. Hsu, B. Ichter, A. Irpan, N. Joshi, R. Julian, D. Kalashnikov, Y. Kuang, I. Leal, L. Lee, T.-W. E. Lee, S. Levine, Y. Lu, H. Michalewski, I. Mordatch, K. Pertsch, K. Rao, K. Reymann, M. Ryoo, G. Salazar, P. Sanketi, P. Sermanet, J. Singh, A. Singh, R. Soricut, H. Tran, V. Vanhoucke, Q. Vuong, A. Wahid, S. Welker, P. Wohlhart, J. Wu, F. Xia, T. Xiao, P. Xu, S. Xu, T. Yu, and B. Zitkovich. RT-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv [cs.RO] , July 2023. [4] D. Driess, F. Xia, M. S. M. Sajjadi, C. Lynch, A. Chowdhery, B. Ichter, A. Wahid, J. Tompson, Q. Vuong, T. Yu, W. Huang, Y. Chebotar, P. Sermanet, D. Duckworth, S. Levine, V. Vanhoucke, K. Hausman, M. Toussaint, K. Greff, A. Zeng, I. Mordatch, and P. Florence. PaLM-E: An embodied multimodal language model. arXiv [cs.LG] , Mar. 2023. [5] A. Szot, B. Mazoure, O. Attia, A. Timofeev, H. Agrawal, D. Hjelm, Z. Gan, Z. Kira, and A. Toshev. From multimodal LLMs to generalist embodied agents: Methods and lessons. 

arXiv [cs.LG] , Dec. 2024. [6] Gemini Robotics Team, S. Abeyruwan, J. Ainslie, J.-B. Alayrac, M. G. Arenas, T. Arm-strong, A. Balakrishna, R. Baruch, M. Bauza, M. Blokzijl, S. Bohez, K. Bousmalis, A. Bro-han, T. Buschmann, A. Byravan, S. Cabi, K. Caluwaerts, F. Casarini, O. Chang, J. E. Chen, X. Chen, H.-T. L. Chiang, K. Choromanski, D. D’Ambrosio, S. Dasari, T. Davchev, C. Devin, N. Di Palo, T. Ding, A. Dostmohamed, D. Driess, Y. Du, D. Dwibedi, M. Elabd, C. Fan-tacci, C. Fong, E. Frey, C. Fu, M. Giustina, K. Gopalakrishnan, L. Graesser, L. Hasenclever, N. Heess, B. Hernaez, A. Herzog, R. A. Hofer, J. Humplik, A. Iscen, M. G. Jacob, D. Jain, R. Julian, D. Kalashnikov, M. E. Karagozler, S. Karp, C. Kew, J. Kirkland, S. Kirmani, Y. Kuang, T. Lampe, A. Laurens, I. Leal, A. X. Lee, T.-W. E. Lee, J. Liang, Y. Lin, S. Maddi-neni, A. Majumdar, A. H. Michaely, R. Moreno, M. Neunert, F. Nori, C. Parada, E. Parisotto, P. Pastor, A. Pooley, K. Rao, K. Reymann, D. Sadigh, S. Saliceti, P. Sanketi, P. Sermanet, D. Shah, M. Sharma, K. Shea, C. Shu, V. Sindhwani, S. Singh, R. Soricut, J. T. Springenberg, R. Sterneck, R. Surdulescu, J. Tan, J. Tompson, V. Vanhoucke, J. Varley, G. Vesom, G. Vez-zani, O. Vinyals, A. Wahid, S. Welker, P. Wohlhart, F. Xia, T. Xiao, A. Xie, J. Xie, P. Xu, S. Xu, Y. Xu, Z. Xu, Y. Yang, R. Yao, S. Yaroshenko, W. Yu, W. Yuan, J. Zhang, T. Zhang, A. Zhou, and Y. Zhou. Gemini robotics: Bringing AI into the physical world. arXiv [cs.RO] ,Mar. 2025. [7] M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair, R. Rafailov, E. Foster, G. Lam, P. Sanketi, Q. Vuong, T. Kollar, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, D. Sadigh, S. Levine, P. Liang, and C. Finn. OpenVLA: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv [cs.RO] , June 2024. [8] P. Intelligence, B. Ai, A. Amin, R. Aniceto, A. Balakrishna, G. Balke, K. Black, G. Bokin-sky, S. Cao, T. Charbonnier, V. Choudhary, F. Collins, K. Conley, G. Connors, J. Darpinian, 10 K. Dhabalia, M. Dhaka, J. DiCarlo, D. Driess, M. Equi, A. Esmail, Y. Fang, C. Finn, C. Glos-sop, T. Godden, I. Goryachev, L. Groom, H. Habeeb, H. Hancock, K. Hausman, G. Hussein, V. Hwang, B. Ichter, C. Jacobsen, S. Jakubczak, R. Jen, T. Jones, G. Kammerer, B. Katz, L. Ke, M. Khadikov, C. Kuchi, M. Lamb, D. LeBlanc, B. LeCount, S. Levine, X. Li, A. Li-Bell, V. Lialin, Z. Liang, W. Lim, Y. Lu, E. Luo, V. Mano, N. Marwaha, A. Mongush, L. Murphy, S. Nair, T. Patterson, K. Pertsch, A. Z. Ren, G. Schelske, C. Sharma, B. Shi, L. X. Shi, L. Smith, J. T. Springenberg, K. Stachowicz, W. Stoeckle, J. Tang, J. Tanner, S. Tekeste, M. Torne, K. Vedder, Q. Vuong, A. Walling, H. Wang, J. Wang, X. Wang, C. Whalen, S. Whitmore, B. Williams, C. Xu, S. Yoo, L. Yu, W. Zhang, Z. Zhang, and U. Zhilinsky. π0.7: A steerable generalist robotic foundation model with emergent capabilities. arXiv [cs.LG] , Apr. 2026. [9] Z. Chen, A. Tian, L. Wang, B. Joffe, Y. C. Lin, Y. Chen, S. Karamcheti, and D. Xu. ReSteer: Quantifying and refining the steerability of multitask robot policies. arXiv [cs.RO] , Mar. 2026. [10] J. Gao, S. Belkhale, S. Dasari, A. Balakrishna, D. Shah, and D. Sadigh. A taxonomy for evaluating generalist robot manipulation policies. arXiv [cs.RO] , Mar. 2025. [11] J. Lee, J. Duan, H. Fang, Y. Deng, S. Liu, B. Li, B. Fang, J. Zhang, Y. R. Wang, S. Lee, W. Han, W. Pumacay, A. Wu, R. Hendrix, K. Farley, E. VanderBilt, A. Farhadi, D. Fox, and R. Krishna. MolmoAct: Action reasoning models that can reason in space. arXiv [cs.RO] , Aug. 2025. [12] S. Ross, G. J. Gordon, and J. Andrew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction to no-regret online learning. arXiv [cs.LG] , Nov. 2010. [13] L. X. Shi, B. Ichter, M. Equi, L. Ke, K. Pertsch, Q. Vuong, J. Tanner, A. Walling, H. Wang, N. Fusai, A. Li-Bell, D. Driess, L. Groom, S. Levine, and C. Finn. Hi robot: Open-ended instruction following with hierarchical vision-language-action models. arXiv [cs.RO] , Feb. 2025. [14] S. Belkhale, T. Ding, T. Xiao, P. Sermanet, Q. Vuong, J. Tompson, Y. Chebotar, D. Dwibedi, and D. Sadigh. RT-H: Action hierarchies using language. In Robotics: Science and Systems XX . Robotics: Science and Systems Foundation, July 2024. [15] Q. Zhao, Y. Lu, M. J. Kim, Z. Fu, Z. Zhang, Y. Wu, Z. Li, Q. Ma, S. Han, C. Finn, A. Handa, M.-Y. Liu, D. Xiang, G. Wetzstein, and T.-Y. Lin. CoT-VLA: Visual chain-of-thought reason-ing for vision-language-action models. arXiv [cs.CV] , Mar. 2025. [16] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, and S. Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics Research , page 02783649241273668, 2023. [17] B. Chen, D. M. Monso, Y. Du, M. Simchowitz, R. Tedrake, and V. Sitzmann. Diffusion forcing: Next-token prediction meets full-sequence diffusion. arXiv [cs.LG] , July 2024. [18] L. X. Shi, Z. Hu, T. Z. Zhao, A. Sharma, K. Pertsch, J. Luo, S. Levine, and C. Finn. Yell at your robot: Improving on-the-fly from language corrections. arXiv [cs.RO] , Mar. 2024. [19] Y. Cui, S. Karamcheti, R. Palleti, N. Shivakumar, P. Liang, and D. Sadigh. No, to the right: Online language corrections for robotic manipulation via shared autonomy. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction , pages 93–101, 2023. [20] C. Lynch, A. Wahid, J. Tompson, T. Ding, J. Betker, R. Baruch, T. Armstrong, and P. Florence. Interactive language: Talking to robots in real time. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , pages 1–8, 2024. [21] E. Chisari, T. Welschehold, J. Boedecker, W. Burgard, and A. Valada. Correct me if i am wrong: Interactive learning for robotic manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,7:3695–3702, Apr. 2022. doi:10.1109/LRA.2022.3145516. 11 [22] P. Sundaresan, Q. Vuong, J. Gu, P. Xu, T. Xiao, S. Kirmani, T. Yu, M. Stark, A. Jain, K. Haus-man, D. Sadigh, J. Bohg, and S. Schaal. RT-sketch: Goal-conditioned imitation learning from hand-drawn sketches. arXiv [cs.RO] , Mar. 2024. [23] J. Gu, S. Kirmani, P. Wohlhart, Y. Lu, M. G. Arenas, K. Rao, W. Yu, C. Fu, K. Gopalakrishnan, Z. Xu, P. Sundaresan, P. Xu, H. Su, K. Hausman, C. Finn, Q. Vuong, and T. Xiao. RT-trajectory: Robotic task generalization via hindsight trajectory sketches. arXiv [cs.RO] , Nov. 2023. [24] K. Black, M. Nakamoto, P. Atreya, H. Walke, C. Finn, A. Kumar, and S. Levine. Zero-shot robotic manipulation with pretrained image-editing diffusion models. arXiv [cs.RO] , Oct. 2023. [25] Y. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Du, B. Sundaralingam, X. Yang, Y.-W. Chao, C. Perez-D’Arpino, D. Fox, and J. Shah. Inference-time policy steering through human interactions, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.16627 .[26] M. Du and S. Song. Dynaguide: Steering diffusion polices with active dynamic guidance, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.13922 .[27] S. Park, H. Bharadhwaj, and S. Tulsiani. Demodiffusion: One-shot human imitation using pre-trained diffusion policy, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.20668 .[28] A. Wagenmaker, M. Nakamoto, Y. Zhang, S. Park, W. Yagoub, A. Nagabandi, A. Gupta, and S. Levine. Steering your diffusion policy with latent space reinforcement learning. arXiv [cs.RO] , June 2025. [29] T. Yoneda, L. Sun, B. Stadie, M. Walter, et al. To the noise and back: Diffusion for shared autonomy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12244 , 2023. [30] A. Wang, X. Yan, B. McMahan, M. Zhou, Y. Yuan, J. Y. Lee, A. Shreif, M. Li, Z. Peng, B. Zhou, Y. Cui, and J. C. Kao. DiSCo: Diffusion sequence copilots for shared autonomy. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction ,pages 982–990, New York, NY, USA, Mar. 2026. ACM. [31] L. Beyer, A. Steiner, A. S. Pinto, A. Kolesnikov, X. Wang, D. Salz, M. Neumann, I. Al-abdulmohsin, M. Tschannen, E. Bugliarello, T. Unterthiner, D. Keysers, S. Koppula, F. Liu, A. Grycner, A. Gritsenko, N. Houlsby, M. Kumar, K. Rong, J. Eisenschlos, R. Kabra, M. Bauer, M. Bosnjak, X. Chen, M. Minderer, P. Voigtlaender, I. Bica, I. Balazevic, J. Puigcerver, P. Pa-palampidi, O. Henaff, X. Xiong, R. Soricut, J. Harmsen, and X. Zhai. PaliGemma: A versatile 3B VLM for transfer. arXiv [cs.CV] , July 2024. [32] Gemma Team, T. Mesnard, C. Hardin, R. Dadashi, S. Bhupatiraju, S. Pathak, L. Sifre, M. Rivi` ere, M. S. Kale, J. Love, P. Tafti, L. Hussenot, P. G. Sessa, A. Chowdhery, A. Roberts, A. Barua, A. Botev, A. Castro-Ros, A. Slone, A. H´ eliou, A. Tacchetti, A. Bulanova, A. Pater-son, B. Tsai, B. Shahriari, C. L. Lan, C. A. Choquette-Choo, C. Crepy, D. Cer, D. Ippolito, D. Reid, E. Buchatskaya, E. Ni, E. Noland, G. Yan, G. Tucker, G.-C. Muraru, G. Rozhdestven-skiy, H. Michalewski, I. Tenney, I. Grishchenko, J. Austin, J. Keeling, J. Labanowski, J.-B. Lespiau, J. Stanway, J. Brennan, J. Chen, J. Ferret, J. Chiu, J. Mao-Jones, K. Lee, K. Yu, K. Millican, L. L. Sjoesund, L. Lee, L. Dixon, M. Reid, M. Mikuła, M. Wirth, M. Sharman, N. Chinaev, N. Thain, O. Bachem, O. Chang, O. Wahltinez, P. Bailey, P. Michel, P. Yotov, R. Chaabouni, R. Comanescu, R. Jana, R. Anil, R. McIlroy, R. Liu, R. Mullins, S. L. Smith, S. Borgeaud, S. Girgin, S. Douglas, S. Pandya, S. Shakeri, S. De, T. Klimenko, T. Hennigan, V. Feinberg, W. Stokowiec, Y.-H. Chen, Z. Ahmed, Z. Gong, T. Warkentin, L. Peran, M. Gi-ang, C. Farabet, O. Vinyals, J. Dean, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Hassabis, Z. Ghahramani, D. Eck, J. Barral, F. Pereira, E. Collins, A. Joulin, N. Fiedel, E. Senter, A. Andreev, and K. Kenealy. Gemma: Open models based on gemini research and technology. arXiv [cs.CL] , Mar. 2024. 12 [33] A. Khazatsky, K. Pertsch, S. Nair, A. Balakrishna, S. Dasari, S. Karamcheti, S. Nasiriany, M. K. Srirama, L. Y. Chen, K. Ellis, P. D. Fagan, J. Hejna, M. Itkina, M. Lepert, Y. J. Ma, P. T. Miller, J. Wu, S. Belkhale, S. Dass, H. Ha, A. Jain, A. Lee, Y. Lee, M. Memmel, S. Park, I. Radosavovic, K. Wang, A. Zhan, K. Black, C. Chi, K. B. Hatch, S. Lin, J. Lu, J. Mer-cat, A. Rehman, P. R. Sanketi, A. Sharma, C. Simpson, Q. Vuong, H. R. Walke, B. Wulfe, T. Xiao, J. H. Yang, A. Yavary, T. Z. Zhao, C. Agia, R. Baijal, M. G. Castro, D. Chen, Q. Chen, T. Chung, J. Drake, E. P. Foster, J. Gao, D. A. Herrera, M. Heo, K. Hsu, J. Hu, D. Jackson, C. Le, Y. Li, K. Lin, R. Lin, Z. Ma, A. Maddukuri, S. Mirchandani, D. Morton, T. Nguyen, A. O’Neill, R. Scalise, D. Seale, V. Son, S. Tian, E. Tran, A. E. Wang, Y. Wu, A. Xie, J. Yang, P. Yin, Y. Zhang, O. Bastani, G. Berseth, J. Bohg, K. Goldberg, A. Gupta, A. Gupta, D. Jayara-man, J. J. Lim, J. Malik, R. Mart´(i)n-Mart´(i)n, S. Ramamoorthy, D. Sadigh, S. Song, J. Wu, M. C. Yip, Y. Zhu, T. Kollar, S. Levine, and C. Finn. DROID: A large-scale in-the-wild robot manipulation dataset. arXiv [cs.RO] , Mar. 2024. [34] Thomas M. Cover and J. A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory . John Wiley & Sons, Nashville, TN, 2 edition, Nov. 2012. [35] Y. Lipman, R. T. Q. Chen, H. Ben-Hamu, M. Nickel, and M. Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. arXiv [cs.LG] , Oct. 2022. [36] P. Holderrieth and E. Erives. An introduction to flow matching and diffusion models. arXiv [cs.LG] , July 2025. 13 A Geometry of initial condition steering 

This appendix expands on intuition for why modifying the initial condition can steer the flow (Sec-tion 3.3). We emphasize that while this section provides more intuition for the steering properties, the primary verification of flow control is empirical (Section 4). 

Flow displacement. Under the Lipschitz assumption on the velocity field vθt (· | c) (Section 3.3), the flow ψt is a diffeomorphism: it is invertible and the initial condition is fully recoverable, x0 =

ψ−11 (x1). Two consequences follow for any shape of pexpert . First, integrating the ODE bounds how far the flow can transport an initial condition: 

ψ1(xuser ) − xuser =

Z 10

vθt (xt | c) dt ≤

Z 10

vθt (xt | c) dt. (6) We define the displacement as 

D(xuser ) = 

Z 10

vθt (xt | c) dt, (7) which is intuitively the sum of vector field displacements over ODE integration. Second, because the flow is trained so that ψ1(x0) ∼ pexpert (· | c) for x0 ∼ N (0, I), any xuser that is probable under 

N (0, I) is mapped to an on-policy action. We emphasize it is important to normalize xuser to the scale of the prior before injecting it. The generated action is thus a valid sample of pexpert that, by (6), differs from the injected xuser by at most D(xuser ).

Basins from the invertibility of flow and a geometric intuition. In Section 3.3, we referred to “basins-of-attraction” for the flow. Because ψ1 is a bijection given c, any partition {R k} of action space induces a partition of initial-condition space into the preimages B(Rk) = ψ−11 (Rk), and the prior mass of each basin equals the expert mass of its region, 

Z

> B(R)

N (x; 0, I) dx =

Z

> R

pexpert (x | c) dx.

A basin is therefore a preimage under the flow. The basins-of-attraction picture additionally requires a geometric property that invertibility alone does not provide: that a basin B(R) lies close to its own region R, so that injecting xuser near a desired action lands in the basin that produces it. If the displacement D(xuser ) is small relative to the separation between candidate actions, the generated action stays near the injected xuser and commits to the behavior the user indicated. Concretely, for any two candidate actions a, a′ (e.g., reaching left versus right), if 

∥xuser − a′∥ − ∥ xuser − a∥ > 2 D(xuser ), (8) then x1 = ψ1(xuser ) is closer to a, since ∥x1 − a∥ ≤ ∥ xuser − a∥ + D(xuser ) while ∥x1 − a′∥ ≥ ∥xuser − a′∥ − D(xuser ). We stress that (8) is only a conditional . Whether the trained flow is well-behaved enough for (8) to hold is therefore an empirical matter, which we defer to our experiments (Section 4): simple keyboard inputs reliably steer π0.5 toward the intended behavior and disam-biguate nearby targets, indicating that the displacement is small in practice. 14 B Task and user study details 

B.1 Task details 

All tasks use a Franka Panda arm with a frozen π0.5 VLA, one scene camera (ZED) and one wrist camera (ZED Mini) following the DROID setup [33]. 

Two-Block pick-and-place. We placed two 2×2 cm red blocks at a distance 10 cm to the left and right side of a square hole. The square hole had an outer diameter of 6 cm and an inner diameter of 4 cm. The VLA received the ambiguous language command, “put the block in the hole.” The goal of the task was to select one block and place it in the hole. On 85% of trials, π0.5 selected the right block. This experiment therefore allowed us to investigate how strongly flow control initial condition perturbations could steer the input. This task setup is shown in Figure 3a, b. 

Five-Block pick-and-place. We placed five 2 × 2 cm blocks with different colors (red, black, yellow, blue, and green) in a line (Figure 6a). We performed three variants of this task, where the blocks were separated by 0 cm, 2 cm, and 4 cm (Figure 6a). The VLA received the ambiguous language command, “put the block in the hole.” On every trial, we randomly generated a “correct” block color, and steered the VLA with flow control to attempt to acquire the correct block. This experiment enabled us to assess the precision of flow control, as well as motivated perturbing the flow process to generate OOD actions (Appendix C). 

Marker-in-Bowl. In this user study experiment, a red, black, and blue marker were placed 10 cm apart, and in front of a bowl (Figure 5a). The markers were mildly taped to the surface to prevent them from rolling. The VLA received the unambiguous language instruction: “put the red marker in the bowl.” If the robot picked up the black or the blue marker, we called the task a failure. This task exposed language following abilities of π0.5-DROID. On 46 .7% of trials, the policy incorrectly picked up the black or blue marker and placed it in the bowl. Trials were also deemed a failure if the marker rolled off the table. 

Cup-Stacking. In this user study experiment, three cups were placed on a table. Their locations varied from trial-to-trial. The VLA received the unambiguous language instruction: “stack the cups.” The cups could be stacked in any order. A trial was counted as successful if all three cups were stacked together. The autonomous policy, flow control, and teleoperation conditions had at most 

2 minutes to complete the task before the trial was deemed a failure. If a cup fell off the table, the trial was deemed a failure. A common failure mode in this task was that a cup was knocked over. We note that π0.5-DROID was capable of recovering from these states, although it generally increased trial times. This task was relatively challenging, with π0.5-DROID successfully completing it 48 .0% 

of the time. 

B.2 User study 

16 participants completed both the Marker-in-Bowl and Cup-Stacking tasks under flow control and teleoperation. They performed 10 trials per condition, and were given up to 5 practice trials if they desired. Teleoperation was achieved through VR by the Meta Quest 2 via DROID [33]. All experiments were IRB approved. Participants ranged from 20 to 32 years old; five participants were female and eleven participants were male. Participants were paid $20 per hour for participating. 15 C Control resolution and off-policy steering 

This appendix expands on the results from Section 4.2 to quantify the precision of flow control steering through IC perturbation, and how to perform off-policy steering, should actions that are OOD of the action expert be desired. 

C.1 Precision of flow IC control.    

> Figure 6: 5-goal task. a, Task where blocks are sepa-rated 0cm, 2cm, or 4cm apart. A correct block is ran-domly specified on each trial. b, Success rate of picking up the correct block.

What precision can flow control achieve in a pick-and-place task? To answer this question, we performed the Five-Block pick-and-place task at varying difficulties ( 0 cm, 2 cm, and 

4 cm separation, Figure 6a). On each trial, a random block was prompted as the correct block to pick. A user then provided real-time arrow key inputs to guide the VLA to correctly select the correct block out of five; for example, if the VLA was hovering over the yellow block but the correct block was red (Figure 6a), the user would press the up key to guide the robot arm to the red block. Occasionally, for the 0 cm separation condition, the gripper was wide enough to pick and place two blocks at once; in these cases, if one of the two blocks was the prompted block, we counted the trial as successful. When blocks were separated by 0 cm, the success rate was 67% , with 27% of the incorrect trials being off-by-one block. This success rate increased to 87% when blocks were separated by 2 cm (all errors off-by-one block) and 100% when blocks were separated by 4 cm. These results demonstrate that as objects become closer together, accurate steering may occasionally select the wrong goal. We primarily observed that when the VLA “committed” to a block to grasp, its action distribution generated trajectories to pick the block that appeared unimodal: flow control inputs did not steer the policy. In other words, in these states, modifying the flow IC struggles to “change the VLA’s mind.” 

C.2 Perturbation of the flow to escape unimodal behavior.          

> Figure 7: Perturbing the flow ODE integration. a, We perturb the flow process after 1s, 2s, or 3s into the trajectory by modifying the flow. b, As more of the flow steps are perturbed, the policy more easily “changes” its mind to reach towards the left block.

The experiments in Appendix C.1 led us to ask: can perturbation of the flow ODE integration induce “corrective” or “change of mind” behav-ior in the VLA? To assess this, we returned to the two block task (Figure 3a) and programmed a perturbation of the flow process to activate at different fixed time intervals in the trial: 1 s, 2 s, and 3 s after the first action taken in the environ-ment (Figure 7a). At later times in the trial, the VLA is more strongly committed to picking the right block, and therefore requires stronger per-turbations to cause it to move towards the left block. To counteract this, we not only perturbed the flow IC by x[i]0 ← − σ for joint 1, but also perturbed the flow for a varying amount of steps. For π0.5, ∆t = 0 .1 for the action expert, meaning that integrating the flow ODE computes x0, x0.1, x0.2, · · · , x0.9, x1. In these experiments, we also perturbed the ODE integration for 0 ≤ K ≤ 10 time steps from t = 0 to t = K∆t, each time performing 

xk∆t ← x(k−1)∆ t − σ√1/∆t for k = 1 , . . . , K .We swept K and measured its effect on being able to cause the arm to move towards the left block. When the perturbation was applied 1 s into the trajectory, we observed 60% of trajectories moved 16 towards the left goal through only IC control. Further, when we set K = 4 , so that we perturbed the first four (out of ten) flow steps, the robotic arm always moved in the direction of the left goal. When perturbations were applied 2 s into the trajectory, we required K = 6 to cause the trajectory to change to the left block on every trial. Finally, when perturbations were applied 3 s into the trajectory, we required K = 8 to cause the trajectory to change to the left block, meaning that we had to perform perturbations late into the flow ODE. Together, these results are intuitive: they demonstrate that perturbing the flow ODE towards desired actions can “change the VLA’s mind” by putting it in new states the unperturbed VLA action expert would not have converged to. We strongly caveat, however, that these actions may be OOD and have low probability on pexpert .We subsequently re-performed the 5 block task with the 0 cm separation condition (i.e., all blocks touching), enabling user inputs to perturb the flow up to K = 7 ODE steps. By perturbing not only the flow IC, but also the flow process, the VLA with flow control selected the correct block on 15 

out of 15 trials where a block color was randomly prompted. This indicates that perturbation of the flow process can provide increased control, including movement towards a goal separate from that determined by the VLA. 17 D Flow control and teleoperation 

Time [s] ( ↓) Marker Stack 

Flow 13.30 35.21 Naive 24.84 42.92 Expert 15.39 30.97      

> Table 2: Trial time for flow con-trol, naive, and expert teleoperators (median-split, n=8 each).

Splitting operators by teleoperation skill (median split on teleop speed, n=8 each), flow control significantly speeds up the naive group (signed-rank p = 0 .008 on marker, p = 0 .016 

on stack) but not the expert group ( p = 0 .17 , p = 0 .97 ). Flow control speeds up the trial time for naive operators from a me-dian 24 .8 s (marker) and 42 .9 s (stack) under teleoperation to-ward the expert-teleoperation level ( 15 .4 s and 31 .0 s), while experts—already fast—are similar (Table 2, times not statis-tically significantly different). The across-user spread in completion time consequently collapses, by 32 × on Marker-in-Bowl and 2.8× on Cup-Stacking. Flow-control completion times are nearly independent of an operator’s teleoperation skill. This can be intuitively understood as flow control “leveling the playing field”: operators who gain the most are those least skilled at teleoperation. 18