Title: Colosseum V2: Benchmarking Generalization for Vision Language Action Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.27759v1

Published Time: Thu, 28 May 2026 00:28:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# COLOSSEUM V2: Benchmarking Generalization for Vision Language Action Models 

Jeremy Morgan 1, Prajwal Vijay 2, Hyeonho Oh 1, Jincen Song 3, Ashvin Arora 1, Alina Du 1, Gaurav S. Sukhatme 1,Jesse Thomason 1, Ishika Singh 1

Abstract —Vision–Language–Action (VLA) models demon-strate promising generalization in robotic manipulation, driven by advances in large-scale vision and language pre-training. This progress can be misleading. Despite the zero-shot perception and language capabilities of VLAs, their overall task perfor-mance often degrades under distribution shifts, revealing gaps in how these systems translate high-level understanding into robust behavior. To systematically study this gap, we intro-duce C OLOSSEUM V2, a large-scale simulation benchmark for evaluating VLA generalization in robot learning across diverse conditions. The benchmark comprises 28 tasks spanning 13 task categories and two robot morphologies, covering a wide range of manipulation primitives and long-horizon behaviors. Built on the ManiSkill simulator, C OLOSSEUM V2 enables fast, GPU-parallelized evaluation and supports both in-domain and out-of-domain testing at scale. We evaluate state-of-the-art methods, including Action Chunking Transformers (ACT) and π0.5, and reveal limitations in both base performance and generalization. We demonstrate strong correlations between simulation and real-world metrics that support the ecological validity of the benchmark. By standardizing tasks, metrics, and evaluation protocols within a unified benchmark, C OLOSSEUM V2 enables reproducible and fair comparisons, reduced evaluation overhead, and accelerated progress toward general-purpose robot policies. 

Index Terms —Robotics, Imitation Learning, Vision-Language-Action Models, Benchmarking, Generalization 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Vision–Language models (VLMs), such as ChatGPT [1] and SAM 2 [2], have demonstrated remarkable generalization across diverse visual scenes and linguistic instructions. These models benefit from large-scale pre-training on Internet-scale data, enabling them to encode novel inputs and understand previously unseen scenarios. Recent VLA models have shown impressive capabilities in robotic manipulation. By leveraging vision and language pre-training, these models can interpret natural language in-structions and recognize objects previously unseen in robotics training data. However, unlike VLMs, their generalization remains limited when evaluated across the full spectrum of manipulation tasks encountered in real-world environments. A key challenge lies in the mismatch between how different components of these models scale. While vision and language representations generalize broadly due to large and diverse pre-training, the downstream behavior of VLA systems is              

> 1Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
> 2Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, India.
> 3Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Science, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
> Fig. 1. Overall generalization results. The left plot shows average absolute success rate across the vision, language, and action perturbations, whereas the right plot shows the average decrease in success rate compared to the no-perturbation condition. The ACT models exhibit strong language generalization but worse visual generalization, and achieve higher base success rates compared to π0.5.

still shaped by comparatively limited robot interaction data. As a result, improvements in perception and reasoning do not always translate into reliable task execution under novel conditions, leading to a gap between apparent and true gen-eralization. A VLA may correctly interpret a new instruction or recognize a new object, yet still fail when the environment, phrasing, or interaction dynamics deviate from the robot data training distribution as shown in our overall generalization result in Figure 1. Such failures highlight that evaluating VLA models requires a comprehensive view of generalization that simultaneously considers perturbations in visual inputs, language instructions, and interaction dynamics. Despite its importance, this gap remains difficult to measure using existing benchmarks. Many current evaluation suites focus on isolated aspects such as perception or language grounding, while manipulation benchmarks often evaluate a limited set of tasks or perturbations. To address this challenge, we introduce C OLOSSEUM V2, a large-scale simulation benchmark designed to systematically evaluate generalization across visual, language, and action axes (Figure 2). The benchmark comprises 28 tasks across 13 task categories and two robot morphologies, providing a diverse and structured evaluation protocol. Built on the ManiSkill simulator, COLOSSEUM V2 enables fast GPU-parallelized evaluation at scale. We evaluate two state-of-the-art methods within this bench-mark, including Action Chunking Transformers (ACT) and 

π0.5. Our results (Figure 1) reveal clear gaps between strong perception-driven capabilities and overall task robustness, highlighting key challenges that remain for deploying VLA systems in real-world settings. In summary, this work includes the following contributions:    

> arXiv:2605.27759v1 [cs.RO] 26 May 2026 Fig. 2. Overview of C OLOSSEUM V2. Left: the full set of tasks across two robot morphologies (Single-Arm and Bimanual), spanning diverse manipulation primitives and long-horizon behaviors. Right: the perturbations used to evaluate visual, language, and action generalization. In total, the benchmark comprises 28 tasks across 13 task categories with 16 controlled perturbation factors.
> •

We introduce C OLOSSEUM V2, a large-scale benchmark specifically designed to measure the Visual, Language, and Action generalization of VLAs. The benchmark provides a comprehensive and structured evaluation pro-tocol, enabling systematic and reproducible assessment of generalization.  

> •

We leverage GPU-parallelized simulation to enable fast, large-scale evaluation, allowing statistically thorough benchmarking (e.g., 200 episodes per task-perturbation pair) to be completed in under half a day. Concretely, ACT can be evaluated on both test suites (Single-Arm, Bimanual) in only 11.5 hours using a single RTX 4090 GPU.  

> •

We establish baselines by training and evaluating two state-of-the-art multitask Imitation Learning models, ACT and π0.5, and identify limitations in their gener-alization behavior and in-distribution performance.  

> •

We validate sim-to-real transfer by evaluating policies on real hardware, demonstrating that performance trends in simulation reliably reflect real-world generalization behavior. II. B ACKGROUND 

The section reviews robotics benchmarks and imita-tion learning methods, highlighting limitations in scala-bility, diversity, and generalization. It also discusses Vi-sion–Language–Action models, noting their promise but con-tinued reliance on large datasets and sensitivity to environment changes. 

A. Robotics Benchmarks 

Large-scale benchmarks have played an important role in enabling systematic evaluation of robot learning methods. For example, simulation-based benchmark RLBench [3], built on the PyRep interface [4] and the CoppeliaSim simula-tor [5], provides a standardized suite of 100 manipulation tasks designed for reinforcement learning and imitation learning research. While widely adopted, the underlying simulator restricts execution to a single environment instance at a time and slow execution (e.g. slower than realtime), limiting scala-bility for large-scale training. The C OLOSSEUM benchmark [6] builds on RLBench and extends it with structured general-ization tests designed to evaluate the robustness of imitation learning models to visual and physical perturbations. Other benchmarks have been proposed to evaluate diverse aspects of robot learning. LIBERO [7] focuses on lifelong learning, introducing task suites that disentangle declara-tive and procedural knowledge during sequential training. LIBERO-Para [8] extends LIBERO with language paraphras-ing to measure robustness to language instructions. Robo-Verse [9] provides a lightweight simulation platform for large-scale reinforcement learning experiments. Platforms such as RoboArena [10] and RobotWin [11] aim to evaluate gener-alist robot policies in distributed or large-scale environments. Bimanual Manipulation Benchmark [12] focuses on bimanual manipulation in the absence of test time changes in the environment. CALVIN [13] studies long-horizon, language-conditioned manipulation with compositional skill chaining. VLABench [14] and VLMbench [15] focus on vision-language reasoning and compositional generalization, with less empha-sis on control robustness. ManipBench [16] evaluates the rea-soning capabilities of VLAs through multiple choice questions. Despite these advances, most existing benchmarks either focus on narrow task families or evaluate policies under lim-ited environmental perturbations. In contrast, C OLOSSEUM V2 is designed to evaluate robustness and generalization across Benchmark Single Arm Bimanual GPU Sim Visual Var. Language Var. Action Var. Diverse Tasks RLBench ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓

Colosseum ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

LIBERO ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓

Meta-World ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓

RoboSuite (Dexmimicgen/Robocasa) ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓

RoboVerse ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓

ManiSkill ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓

CALVIN ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓

VLABench ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

VLMbench ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓

COLOSSEUM V2 ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓  

> Fig. 3. Comparison of existing robot learning benchmarks and simulation platforms. C OLOSSEUM V2 supports diverse manipulation tasks, multiple embodiments, and GPU-parallelized evaluation through ManiSkill, enabling scalable benchmarking of modern robot policies.

diverse manipulation tasks and environment perturbations. 

B. Imitation Learning for Robotic Manipulation 

Robotic manipulation has seen significant progress through learning-based approaches in both simulation and real-world settings. To improve generalization, pretrained visual represen-tations such as R3M [17], MVP [18], and VIP [19] provide transferable features for downstream robotic control tasks. Other works leverage pretrained vision-language models to ground manipulation policies in semantic understanding [20], [21]. Manipulation systems have shifted from direct continuous control to predicting keyframes or action chunks [22]–[24]. 3-D action representations have proven particularly effective for data-efficient learning. For example, PerAct [25], RVT [26], [27], and Act3D [28] learn voxel-based action predictions conditioned on language instructions and visual observa-tions. These approaches demonstrate strong performance with smaller numbers of demonstrations relative to standard BC, often requiring only tens of demonstrations per task. However, such methods are typically trained from scratch for specific robots and environments, limiting their ability to generalize to new objects, scenes, or instructions. 

Vision–Language–Action Models (VLA) models aim to combine large-scale pretrained vision and language represen-tations with robot control policies. By leveraging semantic priors learned from internet-scale data, these models enable robots to interpret open-ended language instructions and gen-eralize to previously unseen concepts [29], [30]. Several recent works demonstrate the promise of this paradigm. PaLM-E [29] integrates large language models with robot perception and control, enabling reasoning over multimodal inputs. RT-2 [30] extends robotic transformers with internet-scale vision-language pretraining to enable semantic generalization. Open-VLA [31] trains a unified vision-language-action policy on large-scale robot datasets and demonstrates strong cross-task transfer. More recent systems such as π0 [32], π0-fast [33], and π0.5 [34] further explore scaling VLA models to broader environments and robot embodiments. Despite these advances, current VLA approaches re-quire extremely large demonstration datasets. For example, OpenVLA [31] is trained on more than 900k demonstrations                                                              

> Task Name Morphology Task Category RaiseCube Single-Arm PJG Pick PickSodaFromCabinet Single-Arm PJG Pick PickDishFromRack Single-Arm PJG Pick StackCube Single-Arm PJG Pick & Place PlaceBookInShelf Single-Arm PJG Pick & Place PlaceDishInRack Single-Arm PJG Pick & Place LiftPegUpright Single-Arm PJG Reorientation RotateArrow Single-Arm PJG Reorientation PegInsertionSide Single-Arm PJG Insertion PlugCharger Single-Arm PJG Insertion HammerNail Single-Arm PJG Tool Use ScoopBanana Single-Arm PJG Tool Use OpenDrawer Single-Arm PJG Articulated OpenCabinet Single-Arm PJG Articulated PlaceCubeInDrawer Single-Arm PJG Long-Horizon CookItemInPan Single-Arm PJG Long-Horizon DualArmCubeHandover Bimanual PJG Handover DualArmBottleHandover Bimanual PJG Handover DualArmLiftPot Bimanual PJG Lift DualArmLiftTray Bimanual PJG Lift DualArmPushBox Bimanual PJG Reorientation DualArmPourPot Bimanual PJG Reorientation DualArmThreading Bimanual PJG Insertion DualArmPenCap Bimanual PJG Insertion DualArmDrawerPlace Bimanual PJG Articulated DualArmDrawerOpen Bimanual PJG Articulated DualArmStackCube Bimanual PJG Long-Horizon DualArmStackTwoCubes Bimanual PJG Long-Horizon TABLE I TASKS IN COLOSSEUM V2, GROUPED BY ROBOT MORPHOLOGY AND TASK CATEGORY .

from the Open-X Embodiment dataset [35]. Even at this scale, such models remain sensitive to perturbations in camera viewpoints, scene geometry, and object configurations, as we show in our results (Section V). III. B ENCHMARK DESIGN 

The benchmark comprises 28 simulation tasks spanning two robot setups: (1) a Single-Arm manipulator equipped with a parallel-jaw gripper (PJG), and (2) a Bimanual configura-tion with two PJG equiped manipulators. In both cases, the underlying robot model is the Franka Panda. The Bimanual setup places two Panda arms on opposite sides of a shared workspace, enabling coordinated dual-arm manipulation. We refer to the two setups as distinct robot morphologies. Each morphology includes 6–7 task categories designed to cover a broad spectrum of manipulation behaviors. For the Single-Arm tasks, the task categories are: Pick, Pick & Place, Reorientation, Insertion, Tool Use, Articulated Object Interaction, and Long-Horizon Manipulation. The Bimanual tasks follow a closely related taxonomy, adapted to account for dual-arm coordination and shared-object manipulation. 

A. Task Categorization 

The task categories are designed to represent a diverse and progressively challenging set of manipulation behaviors. Within each morphology, categories are ordered from rel-atively simple primitives to complex, temporally extended tasks. For example, in the Single-Arm setting, basic picking tasks form the entry-level category, whereas long-horizon manipulation represents the most complex. 

1) Single-Arm PJG: Pick. This category involves grasping and lifting objects using the gripper. Task difficulty increases from grasping simple objects (e.g. a cube) to partially con-strained items, such as extracting a plate from a drying rack. 

Pick & Place. These tasks involve grasping, transporting, and placing an object within a target region. Representative examples include stacking blocks and placing objects on shelves. 

Reorientation. Reorientation tasks involve modifying an object’s pose to match a task-specific orientation. Typical behaviors to reach the target orientation include rotating, flipping, or twisting objects. 

Insertion. This category emphasizes precision manipulation under tight geometric constraints. Representative tasks include peg-in-hole insertions and connector assembly, where success depends on precise alignment between objects and is achieved through controlled contact. 

Tool Use. Tool-use tasks require manipulating one object to effect change in another. Examples include hammering, scooping, stirring, or poking, all of which introduce indirect interaction dynamics. 

Articulated Object Interaction. These tasks involve inter-acting with articulated mechanisms such as drawers, cabinets, doors, or laptops. Successful execution requires reasoning about joint types (e.g., revolute or prismatic), respecting mo-tion constraints, and applying sustained forces. 

Long-Horizon Manipulation. Long-horizon tasks compose multiple primitive actions during a trajectory. Examples in-clude loading a dishwasher, placing a bottle in a refrigerator, or operating a coffee machine. These tasks evaluate sequencing, memory, and robustness across intermediate states. 

2) Bimanual PJG: Handover. Handover tasks require transferring an object between two end-effectors, testing inter-arm coordination and timing. A typical sequence involves grasping with one gripper, passing to the second, and placing at a designated location. 

Lift. In this category, both grippers cooperatively lift and transport a shared object (e.g., tray, box, pot). The primary challenge lies in maintaining balance and consistent force distribution while coordinating dual contact points. 

Reorientation. These tasks require coordinated manipula-tion to modify an object’s orientation using both arms simulta-neously. Success depends on grasp stability and synchronized rotational and translational motion. 

Insertion. This category extends Single-Arm insertion tasks to the Bimanual setting. Typically, one arm stabilizes a mov-able object while the other performs the insertion. Example scenarios include threading a bolt, closing a pen cap, or inserting a peg into a movable socket. These tasks differ from their Single-Arm counterparts in that both objects are movable, rather than only the inserted object. Consequently, these tasks are more difficult as both objects must be coordinated. 

Articulated Object Interaction. As in the Single-Arm case, the robot must manipulate articulated objects; however now, two objects are manipulated simultaneously. For exam-ple, in the D UAL ARM DRAWER OPEN task, two drawers are opened at once, whereas in the D UAL ARM DRAWER PLACE 

task, one arm opens a drawer while the other grasps and places a cube inside. 

Long-Horizon Manipulation. Similar to the Single-Arm case, these tasks involved executing sequential manipulation primitives. Examples include pouring between containers, re-locating the result, or performing multi-stage stacking opera-tions. 

B. Perturbations 

Beyond standard in-distribution evaluation, the COLOS - 

> SEUM

V2 measures robustness under a total of 16 visual, linguistic, physical, and ecological perturbations to assess out-of-distribution generalization. For all perturbations, we adopt the same terminology from the Colosseum [6], where the Manipulation Object (MO) is the object that is directly manipulated, whereas the Receiving Object (RO) is the object that is indirectly interacted with. 

Visual Perturbations. These modifications alter scene appearance without changing the task’s language command or physical configuration. The visual perturbations include changes to object colors (MO-Color , RO-Color ), object textures (MO-Texture , RO-Texture ), lighting conditions (Light-Color ), table appearance (Table-Color , Table-Texture ), background appear-ance (Background-Color , Background-Texture ), distractor objects (Distractor-Objects ), and camera pose ( Camera-Pose ). 

Language Perturbations. Language robustness is evaluated by rephrasing task instructions while preserving task intent. For example, a policy trained with the instruction ‘raise the cube to the target height’ is evaluated on semantically equivalent variants such as ‘pick up the cube and elevate it to the goal height’. For this perturbation, every task has 20 semantically equivalent language commands. 

Action Perturbations. Action perturbations test robust-ness to changes in object properties and initial condi-tions. These include manipulation-object size ( MO-Size ), receiving-object size (RO-Size ), and randomized initial poses ( Pose-Randomization ). 

Combined Perturbations. Combinations of perturbations represent the most challenging conditions a model may face. Fig. 4. Simulator comparison. Frames per second (FPS) is computed as the number of parallel environments divided by the wall-clock time per simulation step (including ACT inference). RLBench is CPU-bound so is limited by the number of CPU cores, whereas C OLOSSEUM V2 leverages GPU-parallel simulation via ManiSkill to achieve substantially higher throughput. Using a NVIDIA RTX 4090, evaluating ACT on both test suites takes only 11.5 hours. In comparison, evaluating the same ACT model on the Colosseum benchmark takes 14.3 hours while generating 10 × fewer success rate measurements and cannot be performed on a headless server. 

To evaluate this, the All condition applies all perturbations simultaneously. 

C. Demonstrations 

Demonstrations are generated by expert motion planning solvers for each task, with privileged simulation state available during planning. Each timestep in a demonstration contains the robot’s state, an action, and an observation. The robot’s state consists of joint positions and velocities. The action space is absolute pose control and absolute joint control for the Single-Arm and Bimanual test suites, respectively. All task environments include 2 external RGB cameras, Orgb-ext ∈

R224 ×224 ×3, and a wrist mounted RGB camera on each robot, Orgb-wrist ∈ R128 ×128 ×3. Thus, the observation space for Single-Arm tasks is Orgb-ext × O rgb-ext × O rgb-wrist , and for Bimanual tasks is Orgb-ext × O rgb-ext × O rgb-wrist × O rgb-wrist .IV. E XPERIMENT SETUP 

We provide initial evaluations of two state-of-the-art language-conditioned imitation learning models: ACT and π0.5

[24], [34]. Models were separately trained and evaluated for the Single-Arm and Bimanual test suites (4 variants total). 

A. Implementations 

The π0.5 implementation is provided by the LeRobot GitHub repository [36]. The ACT implementation is a mod-ified version from ManiSkill [37] which incorporates a lan-guage embedding input to the model. The language embed-dings are generated from the pretrained open-source CLIP language-side encoder [38]. Instructions for training and run-ning both models will be released after review. 

B. Training and Evaluation 

We train each model on a dataset composed of 100 perturbation-free demonstrations per task. Next, following prior work [6], each is evaluated on every perturbation in-dividually. To ensure robust statistical estimates, success rates are measured over 200 episodes for every perturbation. All models were trained on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU. The ACT Single-Arm and Bimanual models were trained with a batch size of 256 and learning rate of 1e-4 until convergence, which corresponds to 130k iterations and 230k iterations for the Single-Arm an Bimanual models, respectively. The π0.5

models were trained with a batch size of 4 and a learning rate of 1e-5, corresponding to 500k and 250k iterations in the Single-Arm and Bimanual models, respectively. 

C. Hardware Validation 

To assess sim-to-real transfer, we replicate three Single-Arm PJG tasks in the real world: R AISE CUBE , R OTATE AR-

> ROW

, and L IFT PEG UPRIGHT and train a ACT single multi-task model from scratch using 60 demonstrations per task. Each task is evaluated under each of the None , MO-Size ,

MO-Color , Background-Color , and Light-Color 

perturbations. V. R ESULTS AND ANALYSIS 

In this section, the following questions are addressed: How do the models generalize along the vision, language, action axes ? How do absolute success rates compare between mod-els ? How does embodiment affect performance ? How well do simulation results predict performance on hardware ?

A. Vision Generalization 

ACT exhibits worse visual generalization compared to π0.5.Numerically, the average decrease in success rate for ACT is 28.57% and 29.06% on the Single-Arm and Bimanual test suites respectively, whereas it is only 7.73% and 9.86% for 

π0.5. We hypothesize this difference is driven by the scale of pretraining on the base π0.5 model and the size of the vision encoder. Specifically, π0.5 uses a ∼400M parameter SigLIP [39] model, whereas ACT uses a ResNet18 [40] model with ∼11M parameters. While the exact size of the pretraining dataset used by π0.5 is not specified, there are 280k gradient steps taken on multi modal web data, likely providing a strong visual prior. On the contrary, the ACT model is not pretrained. Prior work [30], [31], [34], [41], [42], suggests pretraining a policy on multimodal web data (e.g. image captioning, visual question answering, object localization, and point labeling) improves visual robustness. An alternative approach is training the vision representation as a pixel based world model using offline web based video data, which has shown to yield powerful representations [43]–[48]. 

B. Language Generalization 

Surprisingly, ACT exhibits a nearly negligible performance drop on the Language perturbation. The average percent decrease in success rate is 0.28% and -0.57% for Single-Arm and Bimanual, respectively, as opposed to 19.16% and 24.0% for π0.5. We hypothesize ACT’s robustness arises from the CLIP language embedding model’s parameters remaining fixed during training. As a result, semantically equivalent language strings (“raise the cube to the target height” and “lift the cube up to the specified height” for R AISE CUBE ) should Fig. 5. Average change in success rate for each perturbation. The top row illustrates select perturbations for the D UAL ARM STACK TWO CUBES task. The average is calculated from only environments with a base success rate (no perturbations) of at least 10% to reduces the noise in the aggregate metrics. The raw results as well as a list of which tasks are included in the perturbation averages are included in the Appendix, available on the projects website: https://sites.google.com/usc.edu/colosseum-v2/ 

Fig. 6. The per-task success rate of all models with no perturbations. The x-axis orders tasks by success rate; consequently, the ordering between models may differ, so the i-th success rate does not necessarily correspond to the same environment between different models. ACT outperforms π0.5 on both test suites. 

map to similar embeddings during deployment, making inputs under the Language perturbation consistent to those seen during training. In contrast, the entire π0.5 model is fine-tuned, which may result in the language encoder overfitting to the specific language commands seen during finetuning, reducing generalization to language inputs. Consequently, semantically equivalent language strings will no longer map to similar em-bedding vectors. A similar effect of catastrophic failure under language perturbations was observed in previous work [49]. Further research is needed to confirm this hypothesis and identify approaches to mitigate this effect. 

C. Action Generalization 

The average relative task success decrease across the action perturbations is 11.2% and 18.24% (Single-Arm, Bimanual) for ACT compared to 10.08% and 4.11% for π0.5. The primary contributor for this performance degradation is the 

Pose-Randomization perturbation. Under this perturba-tion, the average decrease in success rate is 21.8% and 40.9% (Single-Arm, Bimanual) for ACT, and 12.9% and 51.4% for 

Fig. 7. Simulation vs. hardware success rate comparison. While C OLOS - 

> SEUM

V2 does not accurately predict absolute success rate, the success rate in simulation for a given perturbation does accurately predict the relative performance decrease under a perturbation on hardware. Stated differently, given the success rate with no perturbations and with one perturbation, the success rate of all other perturbations can be accu-rately estimated, as is reflected by an average R2 across the three tasks of 0.798 . Further, the average spearman correlation is 0.916 indicating the ordering of the perturbations by success rate remains consistent be-tween simulation and hardware. Markers denote perturbations: • (None ), 

> ■

(MO-Color ), ■ (Light-Color ), ▲ (Distractor-Objects ), +

(Background-Color ), and 

> +

(MO-Size )

π0.5. Notably, Pose-Randomization results in a greater performance drop in the Bimanual tasks compared to the Single-Arm tasks. We hypothesize this performance drop is due to increased spatial reasoning demands arising from the larger action space of the Bimanual morphology. Additionally, the use of joint space control for the Bimanual tasks as op-posed to 6-DOF cartesian pose control used in the Single-Arm test suite may contribute to the performance drop. In contrast to Pose-Randomization , the MO-Size perturbation has a neutral or positive impact on success rate, as increasing the size of the MO object often makes a task easier. For example, in S COOP BANANA the MO object (a banana) is more easily scooped when its size is increased which reduces the task’s difficulty. Overall, Pose-Randomization remains a primary challenge for both models. 

D. Absolute Success Rate Comparison 

Between the two models, ACT achieves higher success rates across all tasks with no perturbations compared to π0.5.Quantitatively, the sum of the success rates across all tasks with no perturbations is 468.5 and 540.0 for ACT on the Single-Arm and Bimanual test suites, respectively, compared to 340 and 154 for π0.5, corresponding to a 1.37 × and 3.5×

increase. One possible explanation is that ACT overfits to the C OLOSSEUM V2 tasks as it is trained exclusively on demonstrations from the C OLOSSEUM V2. In contrast, π0.5

maintains generally good behavior on a wide range of tasks at expense of in-distribution performance. In other words, π0.5

is a better generalist but worse specialist. Consistent with this interpretation, π0.5 demonstrates improved visual and action generalization (Figure 5), highlighting a tradeoff between base task proficiency and robustness to changes in the environment. Another possibility is the larger model capacity of π0.5 re-quires more fine-tuning data than is available, whereas the dataset size is sufficient for ACT given its smaller model size. Lastly, we note that the training setups differ in terms of batch size, learning rate, and number of updates, which may contribute to the observed gap; however, these configurations follow standard practices for each model family. These results support the claim that strong base performance does not imply strong generalization across visual, language, or action axes. 

E. Differences between Embodiments 

A remarkably similar decrease in success rate is observed across morphologies between the two models. For example, the average change in ‘Mean Absolute Change in Success Rate’ between a perturbation over the Single-Arm and Biman-ual test suites is only 10.83%. For π0.5, the difference is even lower at 3.69%. These values indicate that the perturbations reliably determine a model’s intrinsic generalization, as their effects remain consistent across morphologies, action spaces, and tasks. 

F. Hardware Validation 

Real-world experimental results indicate that changes in task success rate under perturbations in simulation are strongly correlated with those on hardware (Figure 7). However, we observe that simulation results do not reliably predict the 

absolute success rate of a task in our sim-to-real gap experi-ments. Despite this, the average R2 for predicting the change in success rate under a perturbation is 0.798 , indicating that the degradation in success rate for any perturbation can be predicted with high accuracy once the absolute success rate is established. Additionally, the average spearman correlation                

> Fig. 8. Hardware setup for ROTATE ARROW .From left to right, the perturbations are None ,Background-Color ,Distractor-Objects ,
> Light-Color ,MO-Size , and MO-Color . Additional hardware tasks are shown in the Appendix, available on the projects website: https://sites.google. com/usc.edu/colosseum-v2/

across the three tasks is 0.916 , demonstrating that the ordering 

of success rates on hardware is largely preserved between simulation and hardware. VI. C ONCLUSION 

In this work we introduce C OLOSSEUM V2, a large-scale, GPU-parallelized benchmark designed to systematically eval-uate generalization in VLA models along visual, language, and action axes. Our results show that while some models can robustly handle linguistic perturbations and, in some cases, visual perturbations, they remain sensitive to changes in initial conditions, particularly in higher-dimensional action spaces. Furthermore, simulation results were shown to reliably predict relative performance changes in the real world, supporting the utility of the proposed benchmark as a proxy for real-world evaluation despite remaining sim-to-real gaps. By stan-dardizing tasks, perturbation factors, and evaluation proto-cols, C OLOSSEUM V2 provides a scalable and reproducible framework for benchmarking generalization in robot learning. We expect this benchmark to facilitate rigorous analysis of generalization and to drive the development of models that maintain high success rates under diverse visual, language, and action perturbations. REFERENCES [1] OpenAI, “ChatGPT: Optimizing language models for dialogue,” https: //openai.com/blog/chatgpt, 2022, accessed: 2024-08-17. [2] N. Ravi, V. Gabeur, Y.-T. Hu, R. Hu, C. Ryali, T. Ma, H. Khedr, R. R¨ adle, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, E. Mintun, J. Pan, K. V. Alwala, N. Carion, C.-Y. Wu, R. Girshick, P. Doll´ ar, and C. Feichtenhofer, “SAM 2: Segment anything in images and videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714 , 2024. [3] S. James, A. J. Davison, and E. Johns, “Rlbench: The robot learning benchmark and learning environment,” in IEEE Robotics and Automa-tion Letters , 2019. [4] S. James, Z. Ma, D. R. Arrojo, and A. J. Davison, “Pyrep: Bringing v-rep to deep robot learning,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) ,2019. [5] Coppelia Robotics, “Coppeliasim robot simulator,” 2022, https://www.coppeliarobotics.com. [6] W. Pumacay, I. Singh, J. Duan, R. Krishna, J. Thomason, and D. Fox, “The colosseum: A benchmark for evaluating generalization for robotic manipulation,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , 2024. [7] B. Liu et al. , “Libero: Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2023. [8] C. Kim, M. Kim, M. Kang, H. Kim, and D. Jung, “Libero-para: A diagnostic benchmark and metrics for paraphrase robustness in vla models,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.28301 [9] A. Murali et al. , “Roboverse: Towards a unified platform for robotic manipulation,” in Conference on Robot Learning Workshop , 2020. [10] R. Team, “Roboarena: Distributed real-world evaluation of generalist robot policies,” 2024. [11] ——, “Robotwin: A platform for scalable robot learning,” 2024, https://robotwin-platform.github.io. [12] B. B. Team, “Bimanual manipulation benchmark,” 2024, https://bimanual.github.io. [13] O. Mees, L. Hermann, E. Rosete-Beas, and W. Burgard, “Calvin: A benchmark for language-conditioned policy learning for long-horizon robot manipulation tasks,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (RA-L) , vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 7327–7334, 2022. [14] S. Zhang, Z. Xu, P. Liu, X. Yu, Y. Li, Q. Gao, Z. Fei, Z. Yin, Z. Wu, Y.-G. Jiang, and X. Qiu, “Vlabench: A large-scale benchmark for language-conditioned robotics manipulation with long-horizon reasoning tasks,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.18194 [15] K. Zheng, X. Chen, O. C. Jenkins, and X. E. Wang, “Vlmbench: A compositional benchmark for vision-and-language manipulation,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.08522 [16] E. Zhao, V. Raval, H. Zhang, J. Mao, Z. Shangguan, S. Nikolaidis, Y. Wang, and D. Seita, “Manipbench: Benchmarking vision-language models for low-level robot manipulation,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09698 [17] S. Nair et al. , “R3m: A universal visual representation for robot manipulation,” in Conference on Robot Learning , 2022. [18] T. Xiao et al. , “Mvp: Multi-view pretraining for vision-language robotics,” in Conference on Robot Learning , 2022. [19] Y. J. Ma, S. Sodhani, D. Jayaraman, O. Bastani, V. Kumar, and A. Zhang, “Vip: Towards universal visual reward and representation via value-implicit pre-training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00030 , 2022. [20] M. Shridhar et al. , “Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic manipulation,” in Conference on Robot Learning , 2022. [21] W. Huang et al. , “Voxposer: Composable 3d value maps for robotic manipulation with language models,” in Conference on Robot Learning ,2023. [22] S. James et al. , “C2farm: Coarse-to-fine imitation learning for manipu-lation,” in Conference on Robot Learning , 2022. [23] P. Sundaresan et al. , “Kite: Keyframe imitation for task execution,” in 

Conference on Robot Learning , 2023. [24] T. Zhao et al. , “Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with act,” 

arXiv preprint , 2023. [25] M. Shridhar et al. , “Peract: Perceiver-actor for 6-dof manipulation,” in 

Robotics: Science and Systems , 2022. [26] A. Goyal et al. , “Rvt: Robotic vision transformer for manipulation,” in 

Conference on Robot Learning , 2023. [27] ——, “Rvt-2: Scaling vision transformers for robot manipulation,” arXiv preprint , 2024. [28] T. Gervet et al. , “Act3d: 3d feature fields for manipulation policies,” in 

Conference on Robot Learning , 2023. [29] D. Driess et al. , “Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language model,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03378 , 2023. [30] A. Brohan et al. , “Rt-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818 , 2023. [31] M. J. Kim et al. , “Openvla: Vision-language-action models for robotics,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. [32] K. Black et al. , “ π0: A vision-language-action model for general robot control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03854 , 2024. [33] K. Pertsch et al. , “ π0-fast: Fast vision-language-action models for robotics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00000 , 2025. [34] P. I. Team, “π0.5: Vision-language-action models for open-world robotics,” arXiv preprint , 2025. [35] A. Padalkar et al. , “Open x-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models,” 2023. [36] R. Cadene, S. Alibert, A. Soare, Q. Gallouedec, A. Zouitine, S. Palma, P. Kooijmans, M. Aractingi, M. Shukor, D. Aubakirova, M. Russi, F. Capuano, C. Pascal, J. Choghari, J. Moss, and T. Wolf, “Lerobot: State-of-the-art machine learning for real-world robotics in pytorch,” https://github.com/huggingface/lerobot, 2024. [37] S. Tao, F. Xiang, A. Shukla, Y. Qin, X. Hinrichsen, X. Yuan, C. Bao, X. Lin, Y. Liu, T. kai Chan, Y. Gao, X. Li, T. Mu, N. Xiao, A. Gurha, V. N. Rajesh, Y. W. Choi, Y.-R. Chen, Z. Huang, R. Calandra, R. Chen, S. Luo, and H. Su, “Maniskill3: Gpu parallelized robotics simulation and rendering for generalizable embodied ai,” Robotics: Science and Systems , 2025. [38] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, G. Krueger, and I. Sutskever, “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.00020 [39] X. Zhai, B. Mustafa, A. Kolesnikov, and L. Beyer, “Sigmoid loss for language image pre-training,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.15343 [40] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2016, pp. 770–778. [41] J. Lee, J. Duan, H. Fang, Y. Deng, S. Liu, B. Li, B. Fang, J. Zhang, Y. R. Wang, S. Lee, W. Han, W. Pumacay, A. Wu, R. Hendrix, K. Farley, E. VanderBilt, A. Farhadi, D. Fox, and R. Krishna, “Molmoact: Action reasoning models that can reason in space,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.07917 [42] Y. Jiang, A. Gupta, Z. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Dou, Y. Chen, L. Fei-Fei, A. Anandkumar, Y. Zhu, and L. Fan, “Vima: General robot manipulation with multimodal prompts,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03094 [43] H. He, C. Bai, L. Pan, W. Zhang, B. Zhao, and X. Li, “Learning an actionable discrete diffusion policy via large-scale actionless video pre-training,” in The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. [44] Y. Hu, Y. Guo, P. Wang, X. Chen, Y.-J. Wang, J. Zhang, K. Sreenath, C. Lu, and J. Chen, “Video prediction policy: A generalist robot policy with predictive visual representations,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.14803 [45] S. Li, Y. Gao, D. Sadigh, and S. Song, “Unified video action model,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.00200 , 2025. [46] C. Zhu, R. Yu, S. Feng, B. Burchfiel, P. Shah, and A. Gupta, “Unified world models: Coupling video and action diffusion for pretraining on large robotic datasets,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2025. [47] Y. Hu, Y. Guo, P. Wang, X. Chen, Y.-J. Wang, J. Zhang, K. Sreenath, C. Lu, and J. Chen, “Video prediction policy: A generalist robot policy with predictive visual representations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14803 ,2024. [48] T. Ma, J. Zheng, Z. Wang, C. Jiang, A. Cui, J. Liang, and S. Yang, “Dit4dit: Jointly modeling video dynamics and actions for generalizable robot control,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2603.10448 [49] A. Anwar, R. Gupta, and J. Thomason, “Contrast sets for evaluating language-guided robot policies,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2406.13636