Title: Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.17537v1

Published Time: Tue, 19 May 2026 01:46:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model 

Yuanfei Xu 1 Lin Liu 1 Wengang Zhou 1 2 Mingxiao Feng 2 Houqiang Li 1 2 

## Abstract 

3D open-world environments with adversarial op-ponents remain a core challenge for reinforcement learning due to their vast state spaces. Effective reasoning representations are essential in such settings. While existing self-supervised visual foresight reasoning approaches often suffer from multi-step error accumulation, many recent stud-ies resort to injecting domain-specific knowledge for more stable guidance. Our key insight is that the photorealistic fidelity of visual reasoning rep-resentations is secondary; what truly matters is providing informative, task-relevant signals. To this end, we propose ResDreamer, a hierarchical world model in which each higher-level layer is trained to reconstruct the residuals of the layer below. This design enables progressive abstrac-tion of increasingly sophisticated world dynamics and fosters the emergence of richer latent repre-sentations. Drawing inspiration from the “Bitter Lesson,” ResDreamer trains its reasoning repre-sentations in a purely self-supervised manner. The higher-level residual representations are used to modulate lower-level predictions, allowing the world model to scale effectively with only linearly increasing cross-layer communication costs. Ex-periments show that ResDreamer achieves state-of-the-art sample efficiency and parameter effi-ciency. This scalable hierarchical visual fore-sight reasoning architecture paves the way for more capable online RL agents in open-ended, dynamic environments. The code is accessible at https://github.com/XuYuanFei01/ ResDreamer .

> 1

Department of Electronic Engineering and Information Sci-ence, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, An-hui, China 2Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehen-sive National Science Center, Hefei, Anhui, China. Correspon-dence to: Mingxiao Feng <fengmx@iai.ustc.edu.cn >, Houqiang Li <lihq@ustc.edu.cn >.

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). 

## 1. introduction 

In interaction or combat scenarios, task objectives are rele-vant with dynamic elements or proactive agent. This intro-duces a highly dynamic and uncertain environment evolu-tion. The vast state space of an 3D open-ended environment exacerbates this challenge. The agent must construct an internal world representation based on partial information and make decisions accordingly. World models have significantly advanced the frontiers of reinforcement learning (RL) (Schrittwieser et al., 2020; Robine et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Alonso et al., 2024). DreamerV3 (Hafner et al., 2025) achieves strong general-ization across over 150 diverse tasks using a single set of hyperparameters. Robotic World Model (Li et al., 2025a) enables stable prediction of 100+ proprioceptive observation steps. BOOM (Zhan et al., 2025) integrates world models with sampling-based online planning, attaining state-of-the-art (SOTA) sample efficiency on high-dimensional locomo-tion tasks. However, existing model-based RL (MBRL) methods primarily rely on latent-space look-ahead search or model predictive control. Pixel-level reconstruction is rarely exploited as a reasoning representation, largely because it provides no additional information beyond latent represen-tations and suffers from compounding error accumulation. Reasoning representations are critical for long horizon tasks. Large Language Models (LLMs) can provide advanced and interpretable reasoning representations, such as decomposed sub-task prompts and policy-as-code formulations. Recent LLM-powered embodied agents tailored to the Minecraft environment include JARVIS-1 (Wang et al., 2023b), MC-Planner (Wang et al., 2023c), and RL-GPT (Liu et al., 2024). However, despite recent efforts to mitigate the latency of embodied Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning (Zheng et al., 2025; Duan et al., 2025), language-grounded CoT remains poorly suited to high-frequency, dynamic environments due to its inherent inference overhead and lower temporal reso-lution. Embodied visual reasoning representations—such as af-fordance maps (Chu et al., 2025), visual grounding (Li et al., 2024b; Chen et al., 2025b), and goal images (Zhao et al., 2025)—have promised superior task performance. However, they typically rely on domain-specific priors and environment-anchored annotations. In contrast, large-scale 1

> arXiv:2605.17537v1 [cs.AI] 17 May 2026 Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model

domain-general video generation models trained in an unsu-pervised manner, such as Genie (Bruce et al., 2024), WAN (Wan et al., 2025) and Cosmos (NVIDIA et al., 2025), gener-ally comprise over 10B parameters. Their inference latency and deployment costs remain high for embodied online vi-sual reasoning. Neuroscience evidence suggests that the biological neural signals encode prediction error rather than raw sensory input (Rao & Ballard, 1999; Hosoya et al., 2005). Visual neurons employ a dynamic predictive coding strategy to filter out predictable components from the visual stream, transmitting only unexpected surprise or ”report valuable” stimulis (Kok & de Lange, 2015). Building on these insights, we introduce ResDreamer, a hierarchical world model that employs residually connected visual planning representations. By modeling visual recon-struction residuals, each higher-level layer not only builds a richer, more comprehensive internal world representation but also refines the foresight of lower layers through residual reasoning, thereby providing more informative reasoning representation. We adopt a highly lightweight parameter regime: Res-Dreamer operates with only 50–200 million parameters yet successfully solves long-horizon combat tasks in Minecraft open-world environments that feature complex battle me-chanics. Our investigation centers on the novel residually connected visual reasoning representation we propose; ac-cordingly, we incorporate no language-conditioned modules. We assess the method’s effectiveness via online RL success rates on these combat tasks. In summary, the major contributions of this work are: • We introduce a hierarchical world model architecture for representation learning, in which upper layers learn progressively more advanced world dynamics from the residuals of lower layers. This design paves the way for the ”ResNet era” of world models where residual connections enable deeper hierarchies. • We propose a residual-enhanced visual reasoning repre-sentation. By modulating visual foresight with normal-ized upper-layer residual predictions, we deliberately forgo photorealistic fidelity and instead emphasize un-expected visual stimulis, thereby delivering highly in-formative reasoning signals • ResDreamer achieves state-of-the-art sample efficiency and parameter efficiency in online RL settings, and it is the only method to exhibit non-near-zero success rates on high-difficulty tasks such as hunting Shulkers. Ablation studies further isolate the contributions of foresight rollouts and residual modulation. 

## 2. Related Work 

Imagination-driven MBRL . Recurrent world dynamic models facilitate representation, simulation and policy im-provement in MBRL (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018). MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2020) conducts Monte Carlo tree search in the latent space by the learned state space model. Dream-erV3 (Hafner et al., 2025) outperformed expert models tuned for specific domains and, for the first time, success-fully collected diamonds from scratch in Minecraft. LS-Imagine (Li et al., 2024a) breaks the limitations of single-step reasoning and uses the affordance map to trigger the cross-step jump prediction. It simulates jumping to the vicin-ity of high return targets in the future by magnifying specific areas in the observed image. In visual MBRL, transformer-based architectures (Micheli et al., 2022; Robine et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023) and diffusion models (Alonso et al., 2024) have emerged as particularly effective paradigms for world modeling, offering enhanced expressivity and sam-ple efficiency. Although these methods support look-ahead search via Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), none of them are designed to provide reasoning representations that sup-ply additional visual guidance. ResDreamer follows the imagination-driven MBRL paradigm, in which the actor-critic is trained purely on imagined trajectories. This design completely avoids policy distributional divergence. Conse-quently, we can leverage a massive replay buffer as a rich self-supervised signal for world model representation learn-ing, while all policy and value updates remain strictly online. What sets our approach apart is that it naturally constructs and utilizes a hierarchical reasoning representation built directly upon the residuals of sensory signals. 

Embodied Reasoning Representation . Embodied reason-ing is transitioning from high-latency, high-performance paradigms toward compact and real-time approaches. For instance, Fast-ThinkAct (Huang et al., 2026) introduces verbalizable latent planning, where a compact latent CoT is distilled from a teacher model via teacher-student dis-tillation, achieving up to 89.3% reduction in inference la-tency. In highly compositional dynamic scenarios, object-centric reasoning representations have proven effective in improving prediction accuracy for dynamic entities and en-hancing agents’ ability to interact intelligently with them. Meta AI’s Vision-Language World Model (VLWM) (Chen et al., 2025a) exemplifies an alternative reasoning pathway that avoids pixel-level prediction altogether: it uses natural language as an abstract representation of world evolution, achieving extreme semantic compression through structures such as the Tree of Captions. Beyond latent-space reason-ing, leveraging domain knowledge to infer goal states can also be beneficial. Puppeteer (Hansen et al., 2025a) directly employs expert trajectories from human motion capture data to train high-level goal synthesis for low-level whole-body humanoid controllers. COVR (Xia et al., 2026) proposes a 2Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model Raw world observation   

> Lower residual observation
> Imaginary hint observation
> ℎ𝑡𝑡 0
> ℎ𝑡𝑡 1
> 𝑜𝑜 𝑡𝑡 0
> ⊕
> ℎ𝑡𝑡 0
> 𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡 0
> −PPB k
> ℎ𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘
> 𝑜𝑜 𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘
> 𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘 ̂𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘
> ℎ𝑡𝑡+1 𝑘𝑘
> 𝑜𝑜 𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘+1
> −
> rec



> dyn



> rep



> rec

  

> Open-loop imagination
> 𝑜𝑜 𝑡𝑡 1
> ⊕⊕Lower-level residual
> Imaginary hint
> Raw world observation
> Decoder
> Encoder
> Reconstruction estimation of the corresponding signal
> Stop gradient
> Open-loop imagination

Figure 1. Overview of ResDreamer a model base RL algorithm based on hierarchical world model. The left side shows the structure of enhanced visual observations. Adjacent world model layers communicate by residual and predictive signal within the enhanced observation. The right side shows the modules and training process of the k-th layer world model. The Encoder reads enhanced visual observations and gives the posterior zkt . The dynamic predictor learns to estimate zkt with ˆzkt without accessing the observation. The sequence model updates internal state hkt by zkt . The Decoder reconstructs the observation signal which generates reconstruction loss and residual visual signal for upper layer. 

bidirectional learning framework that accelerates RL train-ing by using prior guidance from vision-language models (VLMs), while high-quality trajectories collected by the RL agent during environment interaction are used to fine-tune the VLM. In contrast, our proposed ResDreamer adopts a reasoning representation that is both highly efficient for real-time inference. Its latent rollout and pixel-space fore-sight facilitates efficient reasoning and feature extraction. Moreover, pixel-space signals offer interpretability and the additive property of residuals. Within a lightweight 50-200M parameter scale, we demonstrate that even blurry yet task-relevant visual foresight provides substantial benefits. 

Compared to Hierarchical RL . Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) is widely regarded as a promising approach for mitigating exploration stagnation induced by sparse re-wards in long-horizon tasks. A central focus in HRL is sub-goal discovery. Classic goal-conditioned policies ob-tain sub-goals either by extracting them from successful trajectories in the replay buffer (e.g., HER) or by treating sub-goals as high-level policies in a broader sense (e.g., HIRO). Another key direction involves learning world dy-namics models at multiple temporal scales. For example, THICK (Gumbsch et al., 2024) adaptively discovers larger temporal abstractions by guiding lower-level world mod-els to sparsely update their partial latent states. Recent work has explored more efficient sub-goal discovery algo-rithms and representations (Hafner et al., 2022; Hamed et al., 2024; Hansen et al., 2025b). The motivation of ResDreamer differs fundamentally from these prior HRL approaches. ResDreamer primarily focuses on layered hierarchical rep-resentation learning of world dynamics and leverages the residual-enhanced reasoning representations to boost perfor-mance of RL tasks. 

## 3. Method 

In this section, we present the details of ResDreamer. We introduce ResDreamer from the perspectives of represen-tation learning and behavior learning. First, we describe the basic module of each layer in our Hierarchical Recur-rent State-Space Model (HRSSM). Next, we present our primary innovation in representation learning architecture, namely the enhanced observation through residual connec-tion. Finally, we formalize the loss functions and the overall training algorithm. 

3.1. Hierarchical World Model 

We implement the HRSSM based on Predictive Processing Blocks (PPBs). Predictive Processing or Predictive coding is a paradigm to explain hierarchical reciprocally connected 3Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model Error feedforward channel 

Prediction feedforward channel 

ℎ𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘 

𝑜𝑜 𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘 

𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘 

𝑜𝑜 𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘+1 

> −

ℎ𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘+1 

𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘+1 

> −

⊕ 

> 𝑎𝑎 𝑡𝑡 𝑎𝑎 𝑡𝑡+1

ℎ𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘 

𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘 

ℎ𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘+1 

𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘+1 

ℎ𝑡𝑡+1 𝑘𝑘 ̂𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡+1 𝑘𝑘 

ℎ𝑡𝑡+1 𝑘𝑘+1 ̂𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡+1 𝑘𝑘+1 

ℎ𝑡𝑡+2 𝑘𝑘 ̂𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡+2 𝑘𝑘 

ℎ𝑡𝑡+2 𝑘𝑘+1 ̂𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡+2 𝑘𝑘+1 

Open-loop imagination 

ℎ𝑡𝑡+2 𝑘𝑘 ̂𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡+𝐻𝐻 𝑘𝑘 

ℎ𝑡𝑡+𝐻𝐻 𝑘𝑘+1 ̂𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡+𝐻𝐻 𝑘𝑘+1 

…

…̂𝑟𝑟 𝑡𝑡 ,̂ 𝑐𝑐 𝑡𝑡 , 𝑣𝑣 𝑡𝑡 ̂ 𝑟𝑟 𝑡𝑡+1 ,̂ 𝑐𝑐 𝑡𝑡+1 , 𝑣𝑣 𝑡𝑡+1 ̂ 𝑟𝑟 𝑡𝑡+2 ,̂ 𝑐𝑐 𝑡𝑡+2 , 𝑣𝑣 𝑡𝑡+2 ̂ 𝑟𝑟 𝑡𝑡+𝐻𝐻 ,̂ 𝑐𝑐 𝑡𝑡+𝐻𝐻 , 𝑣𝑣 𝑡𝑡+𝐻𝐻 …

> 𝑎𝑎 𝑡𝑡+2

Current state or imagination entry     

> Reconstruction residual Imaginary hint Raw world observation Decoder Stop gradient
> Open-loop imagination video

Figure 2. The information channel between world model layers is bidirectional. Only reconstruction error and modulated foresight images are transmitted between layers, with no gradients being passed. On one hand, each layer of the PPB generates predictions about the external world and transmits visual planning representations to lower layers. On the other hand, the PPB treats low-level residuals as self-supervised learning signals to obtain a more complete inner representation. 

organization of the cortex (Huang & Rao, 2011). In the k-th layer block PPB k, recurrent state contains the deterministic state hkt and the stochastic state zkt . The se-quence model is used to represent the state transitions condi-tioned by action taken. The Encoder extracts useful informa-tion from the new input observations to guide the recurrent state update, while the Predictor attempts to predict the stochastic state without accessing the observations. PPB k



Sequence model: hkt = Sϕ

 zkt−1, h kt−1, a t−1



Encoder: zkt ∼ qϕ

 zkt | hkt , o kt



Predictor: ˆzkt ∼ pϕ

 ˆzkt | hkt



Decoder: ˆokt ∼ Dϕ

 ˆokt | hkt , z kt

 .

(1) where ˆzkt is the predicted stochastic state, okt and ˆokt are true and reconstructed observations. Layer index k =0, 1, · · · L − 1 and L is the number of HRSSM layers. 

3.2. Visual Hint Structure and Residual Modeling 

Figure 1 gives an overview of ResDreamer, a hierarchical world model in which layers communicate through error feedback and predictive visual hints. This section elaborates on the forms of information exchange between the world model layers. ResDreamer is characterized by progressive residual learning of sensory signals and image foresight corrected by residual prediction. Sensory reconstruction error is fed into the higher-level world model for residual learning. The lower residual observation is given by 

o1 

> res

= Norm 1 (oraw − ˆoraw ) ,ok 

> res

= Norm k  ok−1 

> res

− ˆok−1

> res

 , (2) where k = 2 , 3, · · · , L − 1, the omitted time indices are all 

t, and the same applies hereafter. Layer 0 only has envi-ronmental observations oraw and provides its reconstruction 

ˆoraw , and has no residual observations. Norm k(·) computes the mean and variance across the pixel dimension and up-dates them with exponential moving average. It is worth noting that any layer of the well-trained PPB can rollout latent trajectories by replacing the posterior with the prior. This means that as long as PPB is trained to model the lower residual, it can perform open-loop reasoning and correct the visual reasoning representations at the lower level. The imaginary hint observation is given by 

o0 

> imag

= ˆoraw + ˆ o1  

> res t:t+H

,ok 

> imag

= ˆok 

> res

+ ˆ ok+1   

> res t:t+H

,oL−1 

> imag

= ˆoL−1  

> res t:t+H

.

(3) where k = 1 , 2, · · · , L −2, the subscript {·} t:t+H stands for concatenation of reconstructed open-loop imagination for 4Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model ℎ 00   

> 𝑧𝑧 00
> ℎ01
> 𝑧𝑧 01
> ⊕
> ℎ20
> 𝑧𝑧 20
> ℎ21
> 𝑧𝑧 21
> ⊕

Environment step 

Imagination step t+1 t t+2  t+3 

> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> Raw world observation
> Lower-level residual
> Visual imagination (layer 0 for the specific combat ghast trajectory example)
> Higher levels imagination (layer 1 for the specific combat ghast trajectory example)
> The opponent is predicted to switch to attack mode (red body) in the next moment.
> 5

6   

> 7
> 8
> As the bomb fell, the agent continues to retreat backward.
> Although there are no direct visual cues about the bomb in the environment, the agent is already able to
> anticipate the bomb through visual reasoning .
> The opponent's facial orientation and contour are clearer in the reasoning of the high-level world model .

Environment step  

> 𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡 0
> ⊕
> 𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡 𝐿𝐿
> The bottom-level encoder does not involve lower-level residual.
> The top-level encoder does not involve residual modulation signals from higher levels.
> 𝑧𝑧 𝑡𝑡 𝑘𝑘
> ⊕Encoder
> The bomb is indeed launched at t+3.

Figure 3. Visualization of residual-modulation mechanism of a two-layer world model example. The trajectory clip shows a ghast switching to attack mode (red body) and launching a bomb. The agent is able to anticipate the bomb before it appears through visual reasoning. As the bomb fell, the agent continues to retreat. 

future time t, t + 1 , · · · , t + H − 1. Specifically, if the raw image shape is (h, w, 3) , then {ˆok

res }t:t+H and {ˆok

imag }t:t+H

decoded from a H steps latent trajectory both have the shape of (H, h, w, 3) . They are added by residual connections and concatenated along the channel axis into shape (h, w, 3H).The imaginary hint observation utilities the hierarchical structure of the world model to build visual reasoning rep-resentation. The foresight is blurry but informative and expressive. See Figure 3 which shows the raw observation and imaginary hint observation on world model bottom layer while the agent is combating a ghast. The observation expanded by lower-level residuals and upper-level predictions is the key to our hierarchical world model: 

okt = sg 

ok

imag , o raw , o k

res t



. (4) where sg( ·) is stop gradient operation. In our implementa-tion, all the observations are concatenated along the channel axis. Eventually, a complete enhanced observation tensor is formed with the shape of (h, w, 3H + 6) .The imaginary hint observation is merely additional guid-ance or enhancement for the encoder. Only the lower residual observation and environmental input are recon-structed by the decoder and provide reconstruction loss during the training ˆokt = sg   ˆoraw , ˆok

res t

. The complete process of constructing enhanced observations from the bot-tom layer to the top layer and updating the recursive state in sequence is shown in Algorithm 1. At this point, we have established the feedforward and feed-back information channels of the hierarchical world model based on the enhanced observation (see Figure 2). This ar-chitecture combines the bandwidth advantage of inter-layer communication and the computational efficiency advantage within layers. The visual hint does incur necessary computational cost, but from the perspective of parameter scale, the above archi-tecture introduces almost no overhead. Within each layer, although the number of image channels has significantly increased due to the addition of video hint, the distribution of the visual hint is highly matched with the original im-age distribution benefits from the residual modeling, thus allowing for the sharing of major convolutional features. Therefore, in practice, we have not expanded the depth of the encoder and dimensions of stochastic state compared to DreamerV3 (Hafner et al., 2025). 5Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model 

3.3. World Model and Behavior Learning 

In the context of RL, the final goal is to improve the policy. The actor-critic method is employed for policy optimization and state value learning. Actor: at ∼ πθ (at | st)

Critic: vt ∼ vψ (vt | st) (5) The world environment generously provides continuous stream of sensory signals. Reconstructing sensory inputs serves as a critical training signal for world models. This drives the model to encode as much environmental informa-tion as possible in deterministic state. 

Lk 

> rec

(ϕ) = − ln pϕ

 oraw | skt

 − ln pϕ

 ok 

> res

| skt

 . (6) The stochastic state serves as the information channel be-tween observation and latent state representation. The en-forced sparsity makes the stochastic state more predictable, while the representation loss ensures that the posterior dis-tribution converges to a more predictable distribution. 

Lk

> dyn

(ϕ) = KL sg  qϕ

 zkt | hkt , o kt

 || pϕ

 zkt | hkt ,  

Lk

> rep

(ϕ) = KL  qϕ

 zkt | hkt , o kt

 || sg  pϕ

 zkt | hkt

 

(7) Additional prediction heads perform reward modeling ˆrt ∼

pϕ (ˆ rt | st) and episode-continuation flag ˆct ∼ pϕ

 ˆckt | st



are also trained in a self-supervised manner: 

Lheads (ϕ) = − ln pϕ (rt | st) − ln pϕ (ct | st) (8) The actor-critic is trained purely on imagined trajectories. We compute the bootstrapped λ-return Rλt to train the critic. 

Rλt accounts for rt within the trajectory horizon T and incorporates the critic’s expected value for returns beyond the horizon. 

L(ψ) = −

> T

X

> t=1

ln pψ

 Rλt | st



Rλt =

(

rt + γc t

 (1 − λ)vt + λR λt+1 

 , t < T 

E [vψ (· | st)] , t = T

(9) The actor learns to maximize returns with entropy regular-izer: 

L(θ) = −

> T

X

> t=1

Rλt − sg ( vψ (st)) max(1 , S ) log πθ (at | st)+ ηH [ πθ (at | st)] 

(10) where S = EMA  Per  Rλt , 95  − Per  Rλt , 5 is the scale from the 5% quantile to the 95% quantile maintained by the exponential moving average. The scale factor S is used to normalize the return and is clipped to be no less than 1 to prevent noise amplification. Overall, we follow the official DreamerV3 Hafner et al. (2025) hyperparameters and implementation details. Benefits from DreamerV3’s ro-bust generalization capabilities, ResDreamer can be trained across diverse tasks without hyperparameter tuning. Residual Enhanced Visual Observation is the main inno-vation of this work. To visually demonstrate the structure of this visual foresight and the planning information it pro-vides, we visualize the bottom layer observation in Figure 3. 

## 4. Experiments 

Engaging in combat within open-ended 3D worlds poses substantial challenges, requiring robust terrain understand-ing, effective use of weapons and defensive tools, and real-time anticipation of adversarial enemy movements and be-haviors. We evaluate ResDreamer on five combat tasks from the MineDojo benchmark (Fan et al., 2022) detailed in Table 3. These tasks span a range of difficulty levels and involve fighting various hostile entities under diverse initial inventories and lighting setups. The only non-trivial hyperparameter introduced by Res-Dreamer is the rollout horizon H for image foresight predic-tions. To assess its impact, along with the complementary time stride D (the interval between predicted frames), we conduct a sensitivity analysis on a suite of visual continu-ous control tasks from the DeepMind Control Suite (DMC) (Ortiz et al., 2024) with pixel observations 

4.1. Main Comparison 

We evaluate all methods using success rates during train-ing. The training curves in Figure 4 and bar charts in Fig-ure 8 demonstrate that ResDreamer achieves superior sam-ple efficiency as a hierarchical model-based RL method. To enable a fair assessment of parameter efficiency, we test ResDreamer under two configurations: • ResDreamer (100M×2): a two-layer hierarchical model with approximately 100 million parameters per layer (total 200M). This variant exhibits the strongest sample efficiency and fastest convergence across all evaluated tasks. • ResDreamer (50M×2): a lighter two-layer model. It surpassed the average performance of DreamerV3 with only 84% of the parameter size. The detailed parameter size, hyper parameter and compute budget is shown in Table 1. All the baselines use the default 6Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model  

> Figure 4. Comparison of ResDreamer against Steve-1 (Lifshitz et al., 2023), DreamerV3 (Hafner et al., 2025), PTGM (Yuan et al., 2024). We introduce the compared models in Appendix D. Results of transformer based MBRL method IRIS (Micheli et al., 2022) is presented in Appendix C.1

configuration of the official implementation. Further details are provided in Appendix A. ResDreamer (100M×2) is the only method among the eval-uated baselines that successfully solves the high-difficulty Shulker combat task within 1 × 10 6 environment steps. The hostile mob Shulker launches a guided projectile that causes prolonged levitation and causes fall damage after-wards. This poses complex and challenging dynamic inter-action mechanisms for the agent. Our analysis shows that the residual-modulated visual reasoning representation in ResDreamer provides critical assistance in mastering this in-teraction. The reasoning representation supplies modulated foresight images that enrich the observation stream with predictive signals about impending changes (e.g., incom-ing projectiles, see also Figure 3), making the input more informative for decision-making. 

4.2. Model Analysis 

The foresight rollout and residual connection mechanism are the key components of ResDreamer. We present ablation study to isolate the contribution from each design. 4.2.1. A BLATION STUDY 

The residual connections in ResDreamer enable the flow of both predictive signals and reconstruction errors across hierarchical layers, forming a key mechanism for enhanced visual reasoning. Figure 5 presents ablation results com-paring the standard ResDreamer against several alternative configurations. 

ResDreamer 50Mx3 . We extend the main two-layer model (50M×2) to three layers while maintaining a similar per-layer parameter budget. The three-layer variant achieves a higher mean task success rate than the two-layer version. This demonstrates that ResDreamer’s residual hierarchy pro-vides an effective and scalable pathway for world models. 

ResDreamer Only Residual .In this setup, imaginary hint observations consist exclusively of upper-layer residual sig-nals, excluding the current layer’s own predictive recon-struction. Although the current layer’s latent state already encompasses complete information from open-loop predic-tions, we find that blending predictive reconstruction with residual signals yields superior performance. 

ResDreamer W/O Residual . We remove residual connec-7Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model  

> Figure 5. ResDreamer ablation study results.

tions entirely, so actor-critic and prediction heads only ac-cess upper layer latent state for additional information. Task performance drops markedly, underscoring that residual-modulated visual foresight is the core component that im-proves performance. 

ResDreamer Stacked State . The actor, critic, and predic-tion heads in ResDreamer are conditioned on the stacked latent states of all layers. Despite the stacked states theoreti-cally containing richer recursive information, performance declines under 1M environment steps. We assume that this degradation arises because the distribution of lower-layer residuals shifts during training, causing instability in upper-layer representations before full convergence. Future work could explore longer training regimes or adaptive normal-ization to mitigate this effect. 

DreamerV3 + rollout . We augment a standard single-layer DreamerV3 baseline by adding online-computed visual fore-sight rollouts and reconstructions as additional grounded reasoning observations. Despite this enhancement, perfor-mance remains below ResDreamer, further validating the synergistic benefits of the hierarchical architecture com-bined with residual connections. These ablations collectively isolate the contributions of residual modulation and hierarchical depth, confirming that both elements are essential for ResDreamer’s superior per-formance. 4.2.2. F ORESIGHT HORIZON SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS 

We evaluate ResDreamer using foresight horizons H =4, 8, 16 and strides D = 1 , 2, 4 respectively, keeping the total number of predicted frames fixed at 4. Experiments are conducted on visual ontinuous control suite DMC Vision. As shown in Figure 6, longer horizon and larger stride even-tually converge to higher average performance. However, excessively long horizons can slow early-stage convergence on some tasks due to initially noisy predictions. ResDreamer consistently outperforms DreamerV3 under different horizon configurations. In DMC Hopper Hop, 

H = 16 achieves the best results, as 16 steps align closely with a full hopping cycle, enabling better anticipation of balance-critical dynamics. Overall, longer and coarser foresight proves more informa-tive for complex dynamics after sufficient training, though shorter horizons may accelerate early-stage learning. 

## 5. Conclusion 

In this paper, we present ResDreamer, a hierarchical world model that employs residually connected visual planning representations. By modeling reconstruction residuals, each layer passes only the novel, unexpected sensory signals upward, creating an bandwidth efficient information chan-nel between layers. Residual rollouts from upper layers modulate the visual foresight at lower levels, enriching the predictive reasoning representation. Extensive comparisons and ablation studies demonstrate that ResDreamer achieves superior sample efficiency and parameter efficiency in challenging online visual RL tasks. Critically, the synergy of hierarchical structure, residual modulation, and modulated image foresight proves substan-tially more effective than any subset of these components The primary limitation of the current approach is the fixed foresight horizon length. Longer static horizons incur higher computational cost, while overly short horizons may fail to capture sufficient long-range dynamics. Developing adap-tive or learnable horizon mechanisms remains an important direction for future work. Overall, ResDreamer’s task-agnostic reasoning representa-tion readily adapts to any visual RL scenario, establishing a powerful and broadly applicable baseline for imagination-driven MBRL across discrete and continuous action spaces. It defines the frontier of online RL agents in 3D open-ended dynamic interactive environments. 8Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model  

> Figure 6. Comparison of ResDreamer with different foresight horizon on DMC Vision (Ortiz et al., 2024) continuous control suite.

## Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel must be specifically highlighted here. In this work we adhere to the code of ethics. This work does not involve human subjects, personal data, or sensitive information. 

## References 

Alonso, E., Jelley, A., Micheli, V., Kanervisto, A., Storkey, A. J., Pearce, T., and Fleuret, F. Diffusion for world mod-eling: Visual details matter in atari. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:58757–58791, 2024. Bruce, J., Dennis, M. D., Edwards, A., Parker-Holder, J., Shi, Y., Hughes, E., Lai, M., Mavalankar, A., Steiger-wald, R., Apps, C., et al. Genie: Generative interactive environments. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. Cai, S., Mu, Z., Liu, A., and Liang, Y. Rocket-2: Steering visuomotor policy via cross-view goal alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.02505 , 2025a. Cai, S., Mu, Z., Xia, H., Zhang, B., Liu, A., and Liang, Y. Scalable multi-task reinforcement learning for general-izable spatial intelligence in visuomotor agents, 2025b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.23698 .Chen, D., Moutakanni, T., Chung, W., Bang, Y., Ji, Z., Bolourchi, A., and Fung, P. Planning with reasoning using vision language world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.02722 , 2025a. Chen, H., Zhao, M., Yang, R., Ma, Q., Yang, K., Yao, J., Wang, K., Bai, H., Wang, Z., Pan, R., et al. Era: Transforming vlms into embodied agents via embodied prior learning and online reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12693 , 2025b. Chu, H., Deng, X., Lv, Q., Chen, X., Li, Y., Hao, J., and Nie, L. 3d-affordancellm: Harnessing large language models for open-vocabulary affordance detection in 3d worlds. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20041 , 2025. Deng, J., Wang, Z., Cai, S., Liu, A., and Liang, Y. Open-world skill discovery from unsegmented demonstrations. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10684 , 2025. 9Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model 

Duan, Z., Zhang, Y., Geng, S., Liu, G., Boedecker, J., and Lu, C. X. Fast ecot: Efficient embodied chain-of-thought via thoughts reuse. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07639 ,2025. Fan, L., Wang, G., Jiang, Y., Mandlekar, A., Yang, Y., Zhu, H., Tang, A., Huang, D.-A., Zhu, Y., and Anand-kumar, A. Minedojo: Building open-ended embodied agents with internet-scale knowledge. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2022. URL https: //openreview.net/forum?id=rc8o_j8I8PX .Gumbsch, C., Sajid, N., Martius, G., and Butz, M. V. Learn-ing hierarchical world models with adaptive temporal ab-stractions from discrete latent dynamics. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=TjCDNssXKU .Ha, D. and Schmidhuber, J. Recurrent world models facil-itate policy evolution. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. Hafner, D., Lee, K.-H., Fischer, I., and Abbeel, P. Deep hierarchical planning from pixels. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:26091–26104, 2022. Hafner, D., Pasukonis, J., Ba, J., and Lillicrap, T. Mastering diverse control tasks through world models. Nature , pp. 1–7, 2025. Hamed, H., Kim, S., Kim, D., Yoon, J., and Ahn, S. Dr. strat-egy: Model-based generalist agents with strategic dream-ing. In International Conference on Machine Learning ,2024. Hansen, N., SV, J., Sobal, V., LeCun, Y., Wang, X., and Su, H. Hierarchical world models as visual whole-body humanoid controllers. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pp. 62175– 62195, 2025a. Hansen, N., SV, J., Sobal, V., LeCun, Y., Wang, X., and Su, H. Hierarchical world models as visual whole-body humanoid controllers, 2025b. Hosoya, T., Baccus, S. A., and Meister, M. Dynamic pre-dictive coding by the retina. Nature , 436(7047):71–77, 2005. Huang, C.-P., Man, Y., Yu, Z., Chen, M.-H., Kautz, J., Wang, Y.-C. F., and Yang, F.-E. Fast-thinkact: Efficient vision-language-action reasoning via verbalizable latent planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.09708 , 2026. Huang, Y. and Rao, R. P. Predictive coding. Wiley Inter-disciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science , 2(5):580–593, 2011. Kirillov, A., Mintun, E., Ravi, N., Mao, H., Rolland, C., Gustafson, L., Xiao, T., Whitehead, S., Berg, A. C., Lo, W.-Y., et al. Segment anything. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision ,pp. 4015–4026, 2023. Kok, P. and de Lange, F. P. Predictive coding in sensory cortex. In An introduction to model-based cognitive neu-roscience , pp. 221–244. Springer, 2015. Li, C., Krause, A., and Hutter, M. Robotic world model: A neural network simulator for robust policy optimization in robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10100 , 2025a. Li, J., Wang, Q., Wang, Y., Jin, X., Li, Y., Zeng, W., and Yang, X. Open-world reinforcement learning over long short-term imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.03618 ,2024a. Li, M., Wang, Z., He, K., Ma, X., and Liang, Y. Jarvis-vla: Post-training large-scale vision language mod-els to play visual games with keyboards and mouse. 

arXiv:2503.16365 , 2025b. Li, X., Zhang, M., Geng, Y., Geng, H., Long, Y., Shen, Y., Zhang, R., Liu, J., and Dong, H. Manipllm: Embod-ied multimodal large language model for object-centric robotic manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pp. 18061–18070, 2024b. Lifshitz, S., Paster, K., Chan, H., Ba, J., and McIlraith, S. Steve-1: A generative model for text-to-behavior in minecraft. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:69900–69929, 2023. Liu, S., Yuan, H., Hu, M., Li, Y., Chen, Y., Liu, S., Lu, Z., and Jia, J. Rl-gpt: Integrating reinforcement learning and code-as-policy. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:28430–28459, 2024. Micheli, V., Alonso, E., and Fleuret, F. Transform-ers are sample-efficient world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00588 , 2022. NVIDIA, Ali, A., Bai, J., Bala, M., Balaji, Y., Blakeman, A., Cai, T., Cao, J., Cao, T., Cha, E., Chao, Y.-W., Chat-topadhyay, P., Chen, M., Chen, Y., Chen, Y., Cheng, S., Cui, Y., Diamond, J., Ding, Y., Fan, J., Fan, L., Feng, L., Ferroni, F., Fidler, S., Fu, X., Gao, R., Ge, Y., Gu, J., Gupta, A., Gururani, S., El Hanafi, I., Hassani, A., Hao, Z., Huffman, J., Jang, J., Jannaty, P., Kautz, J., Lam, G., Li, X., Li, Z., Liao, M., Lin, C.-H., Lin, T.-Y., Lin, Y.-C., Ling, H., Liu, M.-Y., Liu, X., Lu, Y., Luo, A., Ma, Q., Mao, H., Mo, K., Nah, S., Narang, Y., Panaskar, A., Pavao, L., Pham, T., Ramezanali, M., Reda, F., Reed, S., Ren, X., Shao, H., Shen, Y., Shi, S., Song, S., Ste-faniak, B., Sun, S., Tang, S., Tasmeen, S., Tchapmi, L., 10 Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model 

Tseng, W.-C., Varghese, J., Wang, A. Z., Wang, H., Wang, H., Wang, H., Wang, T.-C., Wei, F., Xu, J., Yang, D., Yang, X., Ye, H., Ye, S., Zeng, X., Zhang, J., Zhang, Q., Zheng, K., Zhu, A., and Zhu, Y. World simulation with video foundation models for physical ai, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.00062 .Ortiz, J., Dedieu, A., Lehrach, W., Guntupalli, J. S., Wen-delken, C., Humayun, A., Swaminathan, S., Zhou, G., L ´azaro-Gredilla, M., and Murphy, K. P. Dmc-vb: A benchmark for representation learning for control with visual distractors. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 37:6574–6602, 2024. Rao, R. P. and Ballard, D. H. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nature neuroscience , 2(1):79–87, 1999. Robine, J., H ¨oftmann, M., Uelwer, T., and Harmeling, S. Transformer-based world models are happy with 100k interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07109 , 2023. Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Hubert, T., Simonyan, K., Sifre, L., Schmitt, S., Guez, A., Lockhart, E., Hassabis, D., Graepel, T., et al. Mastering atari, go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature , 588(7839): 604–609, 2020. Wan, T., Wang, A., Ai, B., Wen, B., Mao, C., Xie, C.-W., Chen, D., Yu, F., Zhao, H., Yang, J., et al. Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20314 , 2025. Wang, G., Xie, Y., Jiang, Y., Mandlekar, A., Xiao, C., Zhu, Y., Fan, L., and Anandkumar, A. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2305.16291 , 2023a. Wang, Z., Cai, S., Liu, A., Jin, Y., Hou, J., Zhang, B., Lin, H., He, Z., Zheng, Z., Yang, Y., Ma, X., and Liang, Y. Jarvis-1: Open-world multi-task agents with memory-augmented multimodal language models. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2311.05997 , 2023b. Wang, Z., Cai, S., Liu, A., Ma, X., and Liang, Y. Describe, explain, plan and select: Interactive planning with large language models enables open-world multi-task agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01560 , 2023c. Xia, C., Peng, P., Tan, G., Su, Z., Xu, H., Liu, Z., and Li, L. Covr: Collaborative optimization of vlms and rl agent for visual-based control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.06122 ,2026. Yuan, H., Mu, Z., Xie, F., and Lu, Z. Pre-training goal-based models for sample-efficient reinforcement learning. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Zhan, G., Wang, L., Zhang, X., Gao, J., Tomizuka, M., and Li, S. E. Bootstrap off-policy with world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.00423 , 2025. Zhang, W., Wang, G., Sun, J., Yuan, Y., and Huang, G. Storm: Efficient stochastic transformer based world mod-els for reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 36:27147–27166, 2023. Zhao, Q., Lu, Y., Kim, M. J., Fu, Z., Zhang, Z., Wu, Y., Li, Z., Ma, Q., Han, S., Finn, C., et al. Cot-vla: Visual chain-of-thought reasoning for vision-language-action models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp. 1702–1713, 2025. Zheng, Y., Mao, S., Zhang, D., and Cai, W. Llm-enhanced rapid-reflex async-reflect embodied agent for real-time decision-making in dynamically changing environments. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07223 , 2025. 11 Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model 

## A. Model Details  

> Table 1. ResDreamer and DreamerV3 world model settings.

Configurations DreamerV3 ResDreamer (50Mx2) ResDreamer (100Mx2) Foresight horizon 0 4 4Recurrent ht size 6144 4096 6144 Recurrent zt size 32 × 48 32 × 32 32 × 48 

Hidden size 768 512 768 Encoder CNN channels 48 32 48 Decoder CNN channels 32 32 32 hierarchies 1 2 2Total parameters 109.5M 92.0M 192.7M Total training hours 6.2 12.3 14.5  

> Table 2. Hyperparameter settings.

Hyperparameter Value Hyperparameter Value Training 

Learning rate 4 × 10 −5 Slow value network update rate 0.02 Environment samples 4 Value horizon 333 Replay batch size 16 Discount factor ( γ) 1-1/333 Replay batch length 64 Optimizer Adam Buffer size 1 × 10 6 Train ratio 48 

World Model 

Imagination length 15 Return normalization Moving (5%, 95%) Reward loss scale 1 Dynamics loss scale 1Value loss scale 1 Representation loss scale 0.1 Policy loss scale 1 Replay value loss scale 0.3 Reconstruction loss scale 1

Actor-Critic 

bootstrap λ-return λ factor 0.95 Slow value regularization scale 1Entropy coefficient ( α) 3 × 10 −4 Value distribution symexp twohot Figure 2 illustrates the data flow diagram of open-loop imagination and how it constructs enhanced visual observations during training. Our hierarchical model extends the process of updating the internal recurrent state based on observations. See Algorithm 1 for details. The sequence of environmental interactions stored in the replay buffer is utilized only for training the representational learning of the world model, while policy improvement relies exclusively on imagined trajectories. Consequently, the training pipeline and the environment interaction are entirely asynchronous. For a detailed description of the training pipeline, refer to Algorithm 2. 12 Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model 

Algorithm 1 Update the recurrent state of ResDreamer upon observation 

Input: recurrent state st, raw observation oraw .

Output: recurrent state st+1 , world model losses Ldyn (ϕ), Lrep (ϕ), Lrec (ϕ).

1: Open-loop rollout imaginary state-action trajectory ˆs0: L−1, a t+1: t+H

2: initiate ok 

> res

with empty set. 

3: for each k = 0 , 1, · · · , L − 1 do 

4: Compute ok 

> imag

with Eq. 3. 

5: Compute okt with Eq. 4. 

6: zkt ← sample qϕ

 zkt | hkt , o kt

 . {Encoder }

7: ˆzkt ← sample pϕ

 zkt | hkt

 . {Predictor }

8: Compute prediction loss Lk

> dyn

(ϕ) and representation loss Lk

> rep

(ϕ) with Eq. 7. 

9: hkt+1 ← Sϕ

 zkt , h kt , a kt

. {Sequence model }

10: Compute sensory signal reconstruction ˆokt = ˆok

> raw

, ˆok 

> res t

. {Decoder }

11: Compute reconstruction loss Lk

> rec

(ϕ) with Eq. 6. 

12: Compute ok 

> res

with Eq. 2. 

13: end for 

return st+1 , Ldyn (ϕ), Lrep (ϕ), Lrec (ϕ).

Algorithm 2 The training pipeline of ResDreamer 

1: initiate parameters ϕ, θ, ψ .

2: initiate carried state scarry .

3: while not converged do 

4: {World model representation learning }

5: Sample a environmental interaction sequence {oraw , a }0: T −1 from replay buffer. 

6: for each t = 0 , 1, · · · , T − 1 do 

7: Update the scarry upon {oraw }t with Algorithm 1. 

8: Store trajectory feature h0: L−1 

> t

, z 0: L−1 

> t

and losses Ldyn (ϕ), Lrep (ϕ), Lrec (ϕ).

9: end for 

10: {Actor-critic learning }

11: Stack feature sequence F ← h0: L−10: T −1, z 0: L−10: T −1 .

12: Compute the bootstrapped λ-return Rλt and critic loss L(θ) with Eq. 9. 

13: View F as a batch of entry points sized T .

14: Open-loop rollout imaginary state-action trajectory of B time-steps starting at entry points batch F .

15: for each imaginary trajectory {ˆs0: B−1, a 0: B−1} do 

16: Compute the normalized return and actor loss L(ψ) with Eq. 10. 

17: end for 

18: Back propagate losses Ldyn (ϕ), Lrep (ϕ), Lrec (ϕ), L(θ), L(ψ).

19: Optimize parameters ϕ, θ, ψ .

20: end while 

## B. Environment Details 

MineDojo agent’s initial inventory includes a iron sword, shield, and a full suite of iron armors across all tasks. The maximum number of time-steps for one episode is 1000. For other specifications, see Table 3. As shown in Table 3, the five Mobs each possess distinct characteristics. Each episode terminates upon timeout or when the agent’s health reaches zero, which implies that the agent must not only explore and approach enemies but also learn to evade attacks or defend with a shield. The rich interaction mechanisms thoroughly test the generalization capabilities of RL algorithms. In MineDojo tasks, the agent is equipped with iron armors and iron sword shield at initialization. We adopt sparse reward from MineDojo at episode termination and dense reward from MineCLIP (Fan et al., 2022). Each MineCLIP reward is 13 Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model  

> Table 3. MineDojo tasks specifications.

Mobs Biome Mob Features MineClip prompt 

Spider extreme hills Fast movement combat a spider in night extreme hills with a iron sword, shield, and a full suite of iron armors Shulker end Shoots guided bullets which causes floating combat a shulker in the end with a iron sword, shield, and a full suite of iron armors Wolf taiga More agile, group attacks combat a wolf in taiga with a iron sword, shield, and a full suite of iron armors Skeleton extreme hills Accurate ranged attacks with arrows combat a skeleton in night extreme hills with a iron sword, shield, and a full suite of iron armors Ghast nether Flying, ranged attacks with explosive fireball, terrain de-struction combat a ghast in nether with a iron sword, shield, and a full suite of iron armors computed of video segment of 16 time-steps, with calculations taking place every 8 frames. In addition, the agent is rewarded at any valid attack and punished for losing health points. The agent is trained for 1 × 10 6 environment steps. The image input of the MineCLIP model is 160 × 256 pixels, while ResDreamer observers 2x down-sampled images. All experiments can be reproduced with VRAM less than 29 GB. 14 Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model 

## C. Additional Results 

C.1. IRIS Baseline 

We reproduce IRIS on Minedojo and run a experiment using three random seeds and the official default hyperparameters. The only necessary changes were: • Adding support for MineDojo’s MultiDiscrete action space (instead of the original flat Discrete used on Atari). • Setting MineDojo observations to 64×64 (instead of our usual 80×128) to match IRIS’s hard-coded input resolution. This might weaken the model’s capabilities, but is required for compatibility. We have trained IRIS (Micheli et al., 2022) under default configuration for 7 days. So far, IRIS has failed to achieve meaningful success even on the easiest Combat Spider task throughout 500K environment steps. Our current conclusion regarding the reproduction of IRIS on Minedojo is that the default configuration is unable to complete the Minedojo task. Further hyperparameter tuning is still required.  

> Figure 7. Result of IRIS baseline.

15 Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model 

C.2. Main Comparison Bar-chart and Ablation Numerical Result 

Figure 8. Comparisons of success rate ( ↑), episode score ( ↑) and episode length ( ↓) across tasks. It can be seen that ResDreamer achieves higher scores and success rates with fewer steps. Although the ResDreamer (50Mx2) has slightly fewer total parameters than DreamerV3 (100M), it performs better in almost all tasks. 

Table 4. Ablation result 

Configurations hierarchy Rollout Hint Residual Connection Success Rate ResDreamer (50Mx3) 3 ✓ ✓ 0.776 ResDreamer (50Mx2) 2 ✓ ✓ 0.727 ResDreamer (Only residual hints) 2 ✓ 0.563 Dreamer (With roll-out foresight) 1 ✓ 0.559 ResDreamer (Only rollout hints) 2 ✓ 0.400 ResDreamer (Heads conditioned on all) 2 ✓ ✓ 0.377 16 Self-supervised Hierarchical Visual Reasoning with World Model 

## D. Baseline Introduction 

D.1. Selected Methods 

We compare ResDreamer with strong Minecraft RL algorithms, including: DreamerV3 (Hafner et al., 2025): A model-based RL foundation model. DreamerV3 is trained from scratch without demonstrations and domain knowledge. It generates future latent states recurrently with a non-hierarchical world model. STEVE-1 (Lifshitz et al., 2023): An finetuned Video Pretraining (VPT) model for open-ended text and visual instructions following. It is post trained through self-supervised behavioral cloning. We test its zero-shoot text instructions following performance in MineDojo tasks. PTGM (Yuan et al., 2024): A hierarchical approach integrating a high-level task goal generation strategy and a low-level goal-conditioned RL strategy. The high-level goal strategy is pretrained on large-scale, task-agnostic datasets, while the low-level strategy is learned online through RL. We utilize the open-source upper-layer strategy parameters of PTGM and evaluate its online training performance on MineDojo tasks using the default configuration of PTGM code-base. 

D.2. Unselected Methods 

We provide introductions of other strong Minecraft agents and the reasons we do not compare ResDreamer with them. LS-Imagine (Li et al., 2024a): An MBRL method that achieves arbitrary time-span reasoning through dual-branch prediction. It is based on DreamerV3, but it supports long-term prediction by simulating jumping to the vicinity of navigation targets through cropping observation. However, combat missions are different from navigation and exploration. Factors such as terrain, enemy reactions, etc. have a significant impact on the expected return, and cutting the images disrupts the data distribution. For instance, it is not reasonable to jump to flying enemies like ghasts by cropping the image. Voyager (Wang et al., 2023a), JARVIS-1 (Wang et al., 2023b), MC-Planner (Wang et al., 2023c), RL-GPT (Liu et al., 2024): Open-Ended embodied agents that integrates RL with LLM. They adopt heterogeneous hierarchical models, leveraging the prior knowledge of LLMs to achieve task decomposition, long-term planning, code as strategy, and lifelong skill accumulation. Their focus lies in the integration and interaction methods between LLMs and RL, emphasizing the evaluation of an agent’s efficiency in accumulating atomic skills and activating technological milestones. Our proposed ResDreamer is a model-based RL foundation model, focusing on evaluating the data efficiency, scalability, and interpretability. ResDreamer can work together with all kinds of upper layer LLMs as a more powerful RL algorithm. ROCKET-2 (Cai et al., 2025a), ROCKET-3 (Cai et al., 2025b) SkillDiscovery (Deng et al., 2025), JarvisVLA (Li et al., 2025b): Open-world VLA agents powered by imitation learning (IL) and prior knowledge of visual foundation model such as SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023). VLA agents focus on following open instructions within a broader range of atomic skills and their combinations. However, ResDreamer is a MBRL foundation model trained without any prior knowledge. ResDreamer focuses on developing a task-agnostic and domain general hierarchical world model method. 17