Title: Ego2World: Compiling Egocentric Cooking Videos into Executable Worlds for Belief-State Planning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.13335v1

Published Time: Thu, 14 May 2026 01:16:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# EGO 2W ORLD : Compiling Egocentric Cooking Videos into Executable Worlds for Belief-State Planning 

Qinchuan Cheng 1 Zhantao Gong 2 Pengzhan Sun 3

Angela Yao 3 Xulei Yang 4 Shijie Li 41Xi’an Jiaotong University 2Nankai University 

> 3

National University of Singapore 4A*STAR 

Abstract 

Embodied agents in household environments must plan under partial observation: they need to remember objects, track state changes, and recover when actions fail. Existing benchmarks only partially test this ability. Egocentric video datasets capture realistic human activities but remain passive, while interactive simula-tors support execution but rely on synthetic scenes and hand-crafted dynamics, introducing a sim-to-real gap and often assuming fully observable state. We in-troduce E GO 2W ORLD , an executable benchmark that turns egocentric cooking videos into executable symbolic worlds governed by graph-transition rules. Built on HD-EPIC, E GO 2W ORLD derives reusable transition rules from video annota-tions and executes them in a hidden symbolic world graph. During evaluation, the simulator maintains the hidden world graph, while the agent plans over its own partial belief graph using only local observations and execution feedback. This separation forces agents to update memory and replan without observing the true world state. Experiments show that action-overlap scores overestimate physical-state success, and that persistent belief memory improves task completion while reducing repeated visual exploration—suggesting that belief maintenance should be a first-class target of embodied-agent evaluation. 

Project page: https://sj-li.com/PROJ/Ego2World/ 

1 Introduction 

Household activities are difficult for embodied agents because the world changes with every action, yet the agent can only see part of it at a time. In a task such as prepare coffee or make a salad , the agent may need to remember where a cup was last seen, infer that an ingredient has changed state after a manipulation, or revise its plan when an expected object is no longer where it was believed to be. The evaluation problem is therefore not simply whether an agent can produce a plausible action sequence. A more demanding question is whether it can maintain a useful belief over a world that is partially observed and ever-changing, and use that belief for planning and recovery. Current benchmarks capture different parts of this problem, but rarely all of it at once. Egocentric video datasets such as EPIC-KITCHENS [4], Ego4D [6], and HD-EPIC [13] provide observations of real household activity, with natural object layouts, clutter, and long-tailed human interactions. Yet they remain passive: an agent can replay or predict annotated steps, but it cannot try a different action, observe the consequence, receive an execution failure, or replan from that failure. Interactive environments such as AI2-THOR [8], VirtualHome [14], and BEHAVIOR [9] address executability by providing action interfaces and state transitions. However, their scenes are built on synthetic 

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.13335v1 [cs.AI] 13 May 2026

assets and physics engines, introducing a sim-to-real gap that limits how well evaluation outcomes transfer to real-world settings. Moreover, the evaluation often assumes fully observable symbolic states, removing the partial-observation challenge that makes household planning hard in the first place. This leaves a gap between realistic egocentric observations and executable evaluation of belief-based planning. We introduce E GO 2W ORLD , a benchmark that closes this gap by compiling egocentric cooking videos into executable graph-transition worlds. Instead of treating HD-EPIC videos as fixed demon-strations, we use their dense annotations as a source from which symbolic environments can be constructed. The compilation pipeline normalizes fine-grained narrations into primitive actions and semantically coherent action groups, derives reusable transition rules, and instantiates each episode with object instances, functional areas, symbolic states, executable skills, and task goals. The result-ing environment is an executable abstraction, grounded in real cooking activity, where agents can act, receive feedback, and be evaluated through the state changes their actions produced. E GO 2W ORLD 

currently comprises 101 videos, 9,130 compiled action groups, 426 goal-task instances, and 155 normalized executable action types. To our knowledge, it is the first benchmark to combine real-video grounding with hidden-world execution and explicit belief-state evaluation. The full release and evaluation-subset statistics are reported in Appendix A.2 and Table 5. A central design choice in E GO 2W ORLD is to separate the state used by the simulator from the state available to the agent. This differs from passive egocentric video benchmarks, where the agent predicts or replays annotations but cannot act on a changing world [4, 6, 13], and from many interactive simulators, where the environment state is simulator-defined and can be treated as a relatively complete symbolic state for planning or evaluation [8, 16, 14, 9]. In E GO 2W ORLD , the simulator maintains a hidden world graph Gwt that determines action validity, state transitions, and final task success, while the agent maintains a separate belief graph Gbt built only from partial observations, local state-change feedback, and execution feedback. At no point does the agent observe the full hidden graph. It must ground skills, update memory, and replan using its own belief, even when that belief is incomplete or stale. Final success is judged against Gwt. This explicit world/belief separation makes memory and state tracking measurable benchmark targets, rather than implicit properties of a particular agent implementation. EGO 2W ORLD operationalizes this separation through a diagnostic evaluation suite that targets the main failure modes of belief-state planning. The suite asks whether planner backbones can be compared under the same executable protocol, whether annotation-grounded compilation can be replaced by direct LLM graph generation, whether pure LLM planning is sufficient without explicit belief state, how large the gap is between partial-observation agents and executable reference con-ditions, whether action overlap agrees with final physical-state success, and how memory behaves when tasks are chained over long horizons. Through these diagnostics, we find that action-level over-lap and physical-state correctness often disagree: a planner may choose actions that resemble the annotated procedure while still leaving the hidden world in the wrong configuration. Memory abla-tions further show that belief representations reduce repeated visual exploration, while long-horizon experiments reveal that memory selection is as important as memory capacity. These results suggest that progress on embodied planning requires benchmarks that jointly score action plausibility, exe-cutable grounding, belief maintenance, and final-state correctness—capabilities that E GO 2W ORLD 

is designed to expose. The main contributions of this work are: • An executable benchmark grounded in real video. EGO 2W ORLD compiles HD-EPIC egocen-tric cooking annotations into hidden-world graph-transition environments for embodied planning under partial observation, without synthetic scenes or hand-crafted dynamics. • A video-to-world compilation pipeline and hidden-world protocol. We extract reusable tran-sition rules from video annotations to build executable episodes, and separate the hidden world graph Gwt from the agent belief graph Gbt, making belief maintenance and replanning directly measurable. • A diagnostic evaluation suite with actionable findings. We show that action overlap overesti-mates physical-state success, that belief maintenance matters more than action vocabulary, and that uncertainty-aware memory selection is key for long-horizon planning. 2Table 1: Comparison with representative related benchmarks. “Executable” means the environment supports action execution and state transitions. “Belief-state eval.” indicates that the benchmark explicitly separates hidden world state from agent-side memory.                                              

> Benchmark Real video grounded Executable Partial observation Belief-state eval. Diagnostic replanning EPIC-KITCHENS / Ego4D ✓–limited ––Ego4D GoalStep ✓–limited ––HD-EPIC (source) ✓–limited ––ALFRED –✓✓limited limited VirtualHome –✓limited –limited BEHAVIOR –✓limited –limited Embodied Agent Interface –task-dependent ✓limited ✓
> EGO 2W ORLD ✓✓✓✓✓

2 Related Work 

Egocentric video datasets and procedural understanding. Egocentric video datasets provide a rich foundation for studying human activities in realistic environments. EPIC-KITCHENS [3, 4] introduced large-scale unscripted kitchen videos with dense verb–noun action annotations, while EPIC-KITCHENS VISOR [5] further added pixel-level object annotations for objects undergoing transformative interactions. Ego4D [6] scaled egocentric video collection across diverse daily ac-tivities, and Ego4D GoalStep [19] introduced hierarchical goal-step annotations for procedural understanding. HD-EPIC [13], the source dataset used in E GO 2W ORLD , provides dense kitchen-specific annotations, including recipe steps, fine-grained actions, ingredients, object movements, audio events, and object masks grounded in 3D through digital twins. These datasets provide realis-tic visual observations and rich procedural structure, but they are passive: they do not support action execution, state-transition feedback, or replanning after failure. E GO 2W ORLD builds on this line by converting real egocentric annotations into an executable benchmark. Unlike manual simulator authoring, the annotations capture naturalistic object layouts, action orderings, and long-tail interac-tions from real unscripted activity; as Section 5.3 shows, replacing them with direct LLM synthesis yields a 48% hallucination rate. 

Embodied simulators and household task benchmarks. Interactive simulators have enabled em-bodied agents to execute actions and receive environment feedback. AI2-THOR [8] provides inter-active household scenes, and ALFRED [16] builds language-conditioned household tasks on top of AI2-THOR. VirtualHome [14] represents household activities as executable programs, while BE-HAVIOR [9] defines a large set of realistic activities with symbolic goal conditions and intermediate progress metrics. More recent benchmarks such as PARTNR [2] extend embodied evaluation to collaborative multi-agent settings. These environments are executable, but their scenes and tran-sition dynamics are generally simulator-defined rather than compiled from real egocentric video annotations. In contrast, E GO 2W ORLD preserves real visual grounding while adding an executable symbolic layer for state-change reasoning. 

LLM and VLM agents for embodied planning. Large language and vision-language models have been widely used for embodied planning. SayCan [1] combines language-model priors with robot affordances for skill selection. Inner Monologue [7] uses language feedback from the en-vironment to support replanning. ProgPrompt [17] and Code as Policies [11] formulate planning as program generation. SayPlan [15] grounds LLM planning in 3D scene graphs and uses simula-tor feedback for iterative replanning, while RePLan [18] studies recovery from execution failures with visual feedback. Embodied Agent Interface [10] formalizes LLM-based embodied evaluation into modular components and provides fine-grained error-type metrics. These works demonstrate the potential of language-based planning and replanning, but they usually evaluate agents in exist-ing simulators or task environments. EGO 2W ORLD is complementary: it provides a benchmark specifically designed to test whether such agents can maintain and update belief states under partial observation. Table 1 summarizes these differences and highlights the world/belief separation that distinguishes E GO 2W ORLD from prior passive datasets and simulator-defined benchmarks. 3Figure 1: Overview of E GO 2W ORLD . We convert real-world kitchen video annotations into an executable symbolic environment. Video annotations are first normalized into primitive actions, executable skills, tasks, and episodes. These structures are then compiled into a curated transition-rule base and a hidden executable world graph. During evaluation, the agent only receives partial observations, maintains its own belief graph, plans over this belief, executes grounded skills, and replans when simulator feedback indicates an invalid transition. 

3 Benchmark Overview 

The goal of E GO 2W ORLD is to transform passive egocentric kitchen video annotations into an executable benchmark for embodied planning under partial observation. Rather than evaluating whether an agent can merely predict a plausible action sequence from a video, E GO 2W ORLD eval-uates whether an embodied agent can plan, update memory, handle state changes, and replan when its current belief is inconsistent with the hidden environment state. We compile real-world egocentric video annotations into a symbolic simulator driven by world rules 

extracted from the full dataset. We refer to this simulator as the Video-Compiled Symbolic Simulator 

(VCSS). VCSS maintains a hidden world graph Gwt that represents the true environment state, while the agent maintains a separate belief graph Gbt. The agent never observes Gwt directly. Instead, it receives observations through an observation function that provides visual evidence from the original egocentric video and textual feedback describing local state transitions. Planning is therefore performed over the belief graph Gbt, rather than the hidden world graph Gwt. Figure 1 provides the high-level protocol overview; the detailed annotation-to-environment pipeline is given in Appendix A.1 and Figure 2. 

Problem Setup. At step t, the agent receives a task instruction τ , maintains a belief graph Gbt,and selects an executable skill st ∈ S conditioned on its current belief: 

st = πθ (τ, G bt). (1) The simulator decomposes st into its underlying primitive actions and executes them against the hidden world graph Gwt using the compiled world rules. If all preconditions are satisfied, the corresponding world rule is applied and the hidden graph is updated. Otherwise, Gwt remains unchanged and the simulator returns a failure signal. A task is considered successful once the hidden world graph satisfies the goal predicate: 

Φτ (Gwt) = 1 . (2) 44 Video-Compiled Symbolic Simulator 

4.1 Executable World Graph Kitchen Scenario. Our simulator targets egocentric kitchen environments. A kitchen naturally consists of multiple functional areas, such as the refrigerator, sink, stove, countertop, cabinet, drawer, and table. These areas constrain both object locations and executable actions: ingredients are usu-ally retrieved from the refrigerator or cabinet, processed on the countertop, cooked on the stove, and placed on tables or plates. We therefore use functional areas as high-level spatial anchors in the executable world graph. At each timestep, the agent is localized to one functional area and can only execute actions whose preconditions are satisfied within the corresponding local context. This functional-area abstraction makes the symbolic simulator compact while preserving the spatial constraints needed for executable kitchen planning. The hidden world state is represented as a typed attributed graph: 

Gwt = ( Vt, Et, At) , (3) which is maintained exclusively by the simulator. The node set Vt contains functional areas, object instances, substances, and derived products. The edge set Et encodes spatial relations, containment relations, support relations, and functional relations. The attribute set At stores symbolic properties associated with nodes and edges, making the graph both stateful and executable. Each object node vi ∈ V t stores a set of symbolic attributes: 

A(vi) = (label , instance _id , location , state , amount) . (4) Here, label denotes the semantic object category, instance_id distinguishes multiple instances of the same category, location links the object to a functional area, and state records its current symbolic condition. For example, a cup may have state empty , under_dispenser , or 

contains_coffee . For substances such as water, milk, or coffee, we additionally track a discrete amount attribute amount ∈ { full , partial , empty }.The executable world graph is initialized from scene annotations at the start of each episode and can only be modified through valid rule execution. The agent cannot directly add, remove, or edit nodes or edges in Gwt.

Execution Hierarchy. EGO 2W ORLD organises actions into three levels. A primitive action is the atomic unit executed and validated by the simulator, such as open(machine) or pick_up(cup_01) .An executable skill s ∈ S groups a center action that achieves the intended state change with surrounding contextual actions that handle setup and cleanup (e.g., opening a lid before insertion, closing it afterward); the simulator expands each skill into its primitive sequence before execution. A task is defined by an instruction τ and a goal predicate Φτ , and is completed by executing one or more skills that bring Gwt to satisfy Φτ . An episode chains multiple tasks over a shared world state without reset, so earlier actions and mistakes carry forward. The detailed annotation procedure is provided in Appendix A.1; representative transition rules and belief-state schemas are provided in Appendices B.2 and B.3. 

World Rules. The simulator governs all state transitions through a finite set of world rules ex-tracted from all video annotations: 

R = {rk}Kk=1 , rk = ( pre( rk), eff( rk) ). (5) At execution time, the simulator matches the expanded primitive actions of a skill to a rule, checks its preconditions against the hidden world graph, applies its effects when valid, and otherwise returns the first violated precondition as feedback. The full precondition–effect formalism is provided in Appendix B.1, with examples in Table 6. 

Partial Observation Function. The observation function exposes only a restricted view of the hidden world graph. Let ℓt be the current functional area of the agent, and let Gℓt 

> t

be the subgraph of Gwt visible from that area. The observation has two complementary components. The first is a reference image Iℓt

> init

, a repre-sentative frame from the source video showing functional area ℓt at episode start, before any agent 5action has been taken. Because this frame is drawn directly from the real egocentric recording, the agent’s visual perception is grounded in the same real-world distribution as the source video, with no synthetic rendering or domain gap. The second component is a textual state-change summary that describes how the local area has changed relative to this initial image: 

oℓt 

> t

= ( Iℓt

> init

, Render (Diff (Gℓt

> init

, G ℓt

> t

)) ) , (6) where Diff( ·, ·) returns symbolic graph differences and Render( ·) converts them into structured natural language. This two-component design makes the simulator interactive without requiring per-step rendering: the reference image anchors the agent’s visual understanding of the scene, while the textual diff provides an up-to-date account of what has changed since episode start. The simulator also returns action feedback: 

ft ∈ { SUCCESS } ∪ { FAIL (c)}, (7) where c is the first violated precondition. This feedback is intentionally minimal: it explains why the attempted transition failed, but it does not reveal the full hidden world state. 

4.2 Agent-Side Belief Graph 

The agent maintains a belief graph that represents its current understanding of the environment: 

Gbt = (Vbt , Ebt

) . (8) Unlike the hidden world graph Gwt, the belief graph Gbt is not guaranteed to be complete or cor-rect. It is initialized from the initial visual observation and is subsequently updated using local tex-tual state-transition feedback and action execution feedback. Therefore, Gbt serves as the agent’s internal memory for planning under partial observation. Each belief node is associated with metadata: 

mi = (source , confidence , last _observed _step) . (9) Here, source records how the node or state was introduced into the belief graph, such as initial_observation , state_change , action_feedback , or hypothesis . The fields 

confidence and last_observed_step allow the agent to reason about uncertainty and outdated information during long-horizon planning. 

Belief Update. After each skill execution, the agent updates its belief graph using two complemen-tary information channels: the local textual state-change observation oℓt 

> t

and the execution feedback 

ft. Formally, the belief update operator U maps the current belief graph together with the received signals to a revised belief graph: 

Gbt+1 = U

(

Gbt, o ℓt 

> t

, f t

)

. (10) The update proceeds in two passes and is shown in Appendix B.4. 

4.3 Belief-Based Planning and Replanning 

To evaluate LLM-based embodied planning under the E GO 2W ORLD protocol, we implement a base-line agent that maintains a belief graph and uses an LLM as its planning backbone. Given task instruction τ and current belief Gbt, the LLM produces a skill sequence: 

P = [ s1, s 2, . . . , s N ], si ∈ S . (11) Before submitting each skill si to the simulator, the agent resolves two binding decisions from Gbt:

instance binding selects the specific object instance (e.g., cup_01 vs. cup_02 ) by matching required attributes against belief node metadata, preferring nodes with highest confidence and most recent 

last_observed_step ; and area routing determines the functional area ℓ to navigate to before execution. 6Replanning. Replanning is triggered by two conditions: (1) execution failure , when the simulator returns ft = FAIL (c); and (2) stale belief , when a required node has not been observed for more than ∆stale steps, in which case the agent inserts a navigate_to skill to refresh its local observation before proceeding. In both cases the agent first updates Gbt+1 and then re-prompts the LLM to produce a revised plan: 

Pnew = Replan( τ, P old , c, G bt+1 ) . (12) The revised plan retains all completed skills, uses c to localise the fault and identify which remaining skills are affected, regenerates the suffix conditioned on Gbt+1 , and prepends any recovery skill required before retrying (e.g., close(machine) after a failed insertion). The LLM is prompted with τ , the completed prefix, c in natural language, and a serialised snapshot of Gbt+1 , constrained to produce skills from S (prompt format in Appendix E.1). All planning, grounding, and replanning decisions operate over Gbt, while task success is always evaluated against Gwt. This separation directly measures whether an LLM can maintain and ex-ploit belief state for grounded embodied planning, rather than merely predicting plausible action sequences. 

5 Experiments 

EGO 2W ORLD is designed as a diagnostic benchmark for executable belief-state planning, not as a static action-prediction dataset or a single-score leaderboard. Following Section 1, our experiments assess whether the video-to-world compiler produces reliable executable worlds and whether the resulting environment exposes meaningful agent differences under partial observation. We organize the experiments around three axes: construction reliability, planning under controlled interfaces, and metric separation across action overlap, task completion, final-state correctness, valid-ity, replanning, visual-query cost, and long-horizon memory. This organization reflects the purpose of E GO 2W ORLD : exposing where embodied agents fail under hidden-world execution. 

5.1 Experimental Setup Evaluation scopes. All experiments use Scene 1 as the primary evaluation set. The main ablation and reference-gap study use the top-12 videos by action-group count (47 goal tasks, 12 episodes); the memory ablation uses the top-7 subset; the long-horizon study uses all 27 Scene 1 episodes (92 goal tasks). The planner-backbone comparison extends to 183 completed goal tasks across seven scenes under the same Diff-Memory architecture. Trivial goal tasks with at most five ground-truth steps are excluded throughout. 

Agent interfaces. We evaluate two diagnostic feedback interfaces. Flow provides rendered current-state feedback and execution results during continuous execution. Diff additionally provides explicit state-delta diagnostics, including world-diff feedback after invalid actions. These interfaces are part of the benchmark protocol rather than model-specific engineering: they define what infor-mation is exposed to the agent while leaving the hidden world graph unobserved. Final scoring is always performed by simulator replay against the hidden world graph. 

Agent families. The main ablation compares a rule-template Heuristic planner, a closed-world symbolic planner UP Closed implemented with unified-planning [12], and five LLM/VLM-based agents. Flow-Feedback uses Flow feedback without visual querying or persistent memory. 

Flow-Memory adds VLM exploration and persistent memory. Diff-Feedback uses Diff feedback without visual querying. Diff-Explore adds online visual exploration. Diff-Memory combines Diff feedback, visual querying, and persistent memory. Metrics are defined in Appendix C.1, with the WSR replay protocol detailed in Appendix C.2; WSR is treated as a secondary diagnostic throughout, as high slot overlap can coexist with low task completion when unchanged attributes dominate. Additional granularity checks are reported in Appendix D.2. 7Table 2: Aggregate multi-kitchen planner comparison under the fixed Diff-Memory configuration. “Source” marks the open-weight-family or closed-source grouping used in the experiment. State denotes WSR for Qwen-Plus and DeepSeek-V4-Flash; for GLM-5 and the closed-source proxy runs, the reported goal-achievement / step-state-accuracy score is used as the corresponding state score. Coverage is computed over the full 299-task benchmark.                                                                       

> Planner LLM Source Goal Tasks Coverage F1 TSR TCR State Valid Replan VLM Calls Qwen-Plus Open 140 46.8% 0.7356 0.8429 0.6956 0.9489 0.6672 0.9824 2905 DeepSeek-V4-Flash Open 117 39.1% 0.8552 0.9658 0.8630 0.9463 0.5756 0.6332 2464 GLM-5 Open 183 61.2% 0.7490 0.7730 0.5080 0.9470 0.5360 0.2830 626
> Claude Sonnet 4.6 Closed 171 57.2% 0.6619 0.9006 0.8025 0.9544 0.7247 0.6063 3471 Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview Closed 171 57.2% 0.8137 0.9532 0.8386 0.9544 0.4988 1.2081 4027 GPT-5.5 Closed 171 57.2% 0.7727 0.8947 0.7586 0.9543 0.5747 0.5576 2191

5.2 Full Multi-Kitchen Planner Comparison 

We first test whether E GO 2W ORLD can distinguish planner LLM backbones under a fixed exe-cutable agent architecture. This is a controlled benchmark setting: the observation interface, vi-sual model, memory update rule, prompt template, repair mechanism, and evaluator are held fixed, and only the planner LLM is varied. All rows use the same Diff-Memory protocol. We evalu-ate three open-weight family planners, Qwen-Plus , DeepSeek-V4-Flash , and GLM-5 , and three closed-source planners, Claude Sonnet 4.6 , Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview , and GPT-5.5 . Unless other-wise specified, all planner calls are run in non-thinking mode; Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview is the only exception because its deployed interface forces thinking mode. The full benchmark contains 299 goal tasks across seven scenes. Since not all planners completed all 299 tasks, we report coverage explicitly and interpret the comparison as a joint quality–coverage–efficiency analysis rather than as a single absolute leaderboard. Table 2 shows that E GO 2W ORLD exposes non-trivial planner-level trade-offs.DeepSeek-V4-Flash achieves the strongest completion-oriented performance among all evaluated planners, leading on F1, TSR, and TCR. Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview is the strongest closed-source planner on completion metrics, but it has the weakest validity and the highest replanning burden. Claude Sonnet 4.6 achieves the best executable validity, suggesting a more execution-stable but action-noisier plan-ning profile. GLM-5 is not the quality leader, but it has the widest coverage among the open-weight family, the lowest replanning rate, the fewest VLM calls, and the lowest estimated planner cost. GPT-5.5 does not dominate any single quality metric, but provides a balanced closed-source profile with relatively low replanning and low VLM usage. The result highlights why E GO 2W ORLD should be read as a multi-metric executable benchmark. Several planners obtain similar state scores near 0.95, but differ substantially in F1, TSR, TCR, validity, replanning, and visual-query cost. Completion quality, executable validity, and final-state overlap are therefore not interchangeable. This is precisely the behavior expected from a useful benchmark for belief-state planning: it does not collapse model behavior into a single score, but exposes the different resource and execution profiles required to obtain successful plans. The open-weight and closed-source groups also occupy different parts of the quality–efficiency space. DeepSeek-V4-Flash currently provides the strongest completion-oriented open-weight pro-file, Qwen-Plus is more conservative and validity-oriented, and GLM-5 is the strongest low-cost coverage engine. Among closed-source planners, Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview is closest to DeepSeek on task completion, Claude Sonnet 4.6 is the most executable per primitive step, and GPT-5.5 offers the most balanced closed-source trade-off. The controlled Diff-Memory setting therefore demon-strates that E GO 2W ORLD can compare foundation-model planners under the same embodied execu-tion protocol while making their quality, validity, coverage, and exploration-cost trade-offs visible. Scene-level backbone details and the visualization of quality–VLM trade-offs are reported in Ap-pendix D.1, Table 8, and Figure 3. 8Table 3: Direct LLM world-graph generation audit on 50 sampled action-group cases. Direct genera-tion can produce plausible symbolic outputs, but lacks source grounding and executable consistency.                          

> Method Coverage ↑Hallucination ↓Missing state ↓Replay success ↑Temporal error ↓
> Direct LLM-Graph 0.56 0.48 0.80 0.06 0.44 Direct LLM-Graph + Self-Check 0.54 0.42 0.78 0.12 0.46 Compiler-grounded construction 1.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00

Table 4: Main ablation on Scene 1 top-12 videos at goal-task granularity. “Diff FB” denotes state-delta and world-diff feedback after invalid actions.                                                                                 

> Planner LLM Diff FB VLM Memory F1 TSR WSR TCR Valid VLM Calls Heuristic ––––0.8010 0.9149 0.2388 0.6089 0.6830 0UP Closed ––––0.8648 0.8511 0.3085 0.5786 0.6081 0Flow-Feedback ✓–––0.7676 0.9362 0.3209 0.7543 0.6946 0Flow-Memory ✓–✓✓0.7726 0.8936 0.3523 0.7312 0.6840 1647 Diff-Feedback ✓✓––0.7260 0.8298 0.3041 0.6627 0.6712 0Diff-Explore ✓✓✓–0.7963 0.9149 0.3423 0.7721 0.6849 3028
> Diff-Memory ✓✓✓✓0.7605 0.8936 0.2892 0.7230 0.6701 1496

5.3 Benchmark Construction Validation 

The compilation pipeline is subject to deterministic schema checks, bounded LLM-assisted seman-tic review, human validation of sampled transition rules, and executable replay validation; Ap-pendix A.1.2 details this quality-control protocol. We next test whether the executable benchmark construction can be replaced by direct LLM graph synthesis. A direct prompting baseline receives narration-like action-group evidence and is asked to generate object instances, states, and transitions. A second variant adds self-checking. We compare both with the compiler-grounded construction on 50 sampled action-group cases. The audit mea-sures source-step coverage, hallucinated object/state/action rate, missing key-state rate, executable replay success, and temporal error. Table 3 shows that direct graph generation can produce plausible symbolic descriptions, but it is unreliable under executable benchmark criteria. Direct generation covers only 56% of required source evidence, has a hallucination rate of 48%, misses most key state changes, and succeeds in executable replay on only 6% of cases. Self-checking improves replay success to 12% and slightly reduces hallucination, but remains far below the compiler-grounded reference. The failures are not merely formatting errors. Direct LLM-Graph often produces plausible but under-specified graphs: it merges temporal steps, omits intermediate states such as open or loaded , in-vents unsupported cleanup actions, and confuses object identity or containment. These errors break the precondition–effect chains required for replay, while self-checking mainly repairs surface incon-sistencies. Thus, the compiler is not merely an engineering convenience: it enforces provenance alignment, schema discipline, temporal consistency, and executable replayability. This audit directly addresses a central benchmark question: E GO 2W ORLD is not simply an LLM-generated symbolic description of videos. Its executable layer depends on source-grounded compila-tion, structural validation, and simulator replay. We additionally audited the full Scene 1 compilation pipeline and verified that all intermediate stages are regenerable over all 8 windows; additional con-struction details are provided in Appendix A.1, with release statistics in Table 5. 

5.4 Main Agent Ablation: Action Success Is Not State Success 

Table 4 shows that action-centric and state-centric metrics rank agents differently. The same F1/WSR/TCR trends are visualized in Appendix D.2, Figure 4. UP Closed achieves the highest F1, but its WSR remains lower than that of Flow-Memory, which achieves the strongest final-state overlap. Diff-Explore achieves the highest TCR but also uses the most visual queries. Thus, match-ing annotated action types, completing key actions, and ending in the correct physical state are related but distinct capabilities. 9The main lesson is that local action plausibility and final executable outcome should not be conflated. A planner may select plausible action types while binding them to the wrong object, executing them in the wrong functional area, or failing to induce the required state changes. This is the core empirical reason for including replay-based state diagnostics in E GO 2W ORLD .

6 Conclusion 

We presented E GO 2W ORLD , an executable benchmark that compiles egocentric cooking video anno-tations into hidden-world graph-transition environments for embodied planning under partial obser-vation. Our experiments show that action overlap overestimates physical-state success, that belief representations matter more than action vocabulary, and that memory selection is as important as memory capacity in long-horizon settings. These results, together with the finding that annotation-grounded compilation cannot be replaced by direct LLM synthesis, suggest that robust embodied planning requires benchmarks that jointly evaluate belief maintenance, executable grounding, and final physical-state correctness—all of which E GO 2W ORLD is designed to expose. Appendix G provides expanded limitations and scope discussion. 

References 

[1] Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea Finn, Chuyuan Kelly Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alexander Her-zog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jau-regui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil J. Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy Zeng. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , vol-ume 205 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 287–318. PMLR, 2023. [2] Matthew Chang, Gunjan Chhablani, Alexander Clegg, Mikael Dallaire Cote, Ruta Desai, Michal Hlavac, Vladimir Karashchuk, Jacob Krantz, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Priyam Parashar, Sid-dharth Patki, Ishita Prasad, Xavier Puig, Akshara Rai, Ram Ramrakhya, Daniel Tran, Joanne Truong, John M. Turner, Eric Undersander, and Tsung-Yen Yang. PARTNR: A benchmark for planning and reasoning in embodied multi-agent tasks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [3] Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Sanja Fidler, Antonino Furnari, Evan-gelos Kazakos, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, and Michael Wray. Scaling egocentric vision: The EPIC-KITCHENS dataset. In Proceedings of the Euro-pean Conference on Computer Vision , pages 720–736, 2018. [4] Dima Damen, Hazel Doughty, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Antonino Furnari, Evangelos Kaza-kos, Jian Ma, Davide Moltisanti, Jonathan Munro, Toby Perrett, Will Price, and Michael Wray. Rescaling egocentric vision: Collection, pipeline and challenges for EPIC-KITCHENS-100. 

International Journal of Computer Vision , 130(1):33–55, 2022. [5] Ahmad Darkhalil, Dandan Shan, Bin Zhu, Jian Ma, Amlan Kar, Richard E. L. Higgins, Sanja Fidler, David Fouhey, and Dima Damen. EPIC-KITCHENS VISOR benchmark: VIdeo seg-mentations and object relations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol-ume 35, pages 13745–13758, 2022. [6] Kristen Grauman, Andrew Westbury, Eugene Byrne, Zachary Chavis, Antonino Furnari, Ro-hit Girdhar, Jackson Hamburger, Hao Jiang, Miao Liu, Xingyu Liu, Miguel Martin, Tushar Nagarajan, Ilija Radosavovic, Santhosh Kumar Ramakrishnan, Fiona Ryan, Jayant Sharma, Michael Wray, Mengmeng Xu, Eric Zhongcong Xu, Chen Zhao, Siddhant Bansal, Dhruv Ba-tra, Vincent Cartillier, Sean Crane, Tien Do, Morrie Doulaty, Akshay Erapalli, Christoph Fe-ichtenhofer, Adriano Fragomeni, Qichen Fu, Abrham Gebreselasie, Cristina Gonzalez, James Hillis, Xuhua Huang, Yifei Huang, Wenqi Jia, Weslie Khoo, Jachym Kolar, Satwik Kottur, Anurag Kumar, Federico Landini, Chao Li, Yanghao Li, Zhenqiang Li, Karttikeya Mangalam, 10 Raghava Modhugu, Jonathan Munro, Tullie Murrell, Takumi Nishiyasu, Will Price, Paola Ruiz Puentes, Merey Ramazanova, Leda Sari, Kiran Somasundaram, Audrey Southerland, Yusuke Sugano, Ruijie Tao, Minh Vo, Yuchen Wang, Xindi Wu, Takuma Yagi, Ziwei Zhao, Yunyi Zhu, Pablo Arbelaez, David Crandall, Dima Damen, Giovanni Maria Farinella, Christian Fuegen, Bernard Ghanem, Vamsi Krishna Ithapu, C. V. Jawahar, Hanbyul Joo, Kris Kitani, Haizhou Li, Richard Newcombe, Aude Oliva, Hyun Soo Park, James M. Rehg, Yoichi Sato, Jianbo Shi, Mike Zheng Shou, Antonio Torralba, Lorenzo Torresani, Mingfei Yan, and Jitendra Malik. Ego4D: Around the world in 3,000 hours of egocentric video. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 18995–19012, 2022. [7] Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Tomas Jackson, Noah Brown, Linda Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Em-bodied reasoning through planning with language models. In Proceedings of the 6th Confer-ence on Robot Learning , pages 1769–1782. PMLR, 2023. [8] Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Matt Deitke, Kiana Ehsani, Daniel Gordon, Yuke Zhu, Aniruddha Kembhavi, Abhinav Gupta, and Ali Farhadi. AI2-THOR: An interactive 3d environment for visual AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.05474 , 2017. [9] Chengshu Li, Ruohan Zhang, Josiah Wong, Cem Gokmen, Sanjana Srivastava, Roberto Martín-Martín, Chen Wang, Gabrael Levine, Michael Lingelbach, Jiankai Sun, Mona Anvari, Minjune Hwang, Manasi Sharma, Arman Aydin, Dhruva Bansal, Samuel Hunter, Kyu-Young Kim, Alan Lou, Caleb R. Matthews, Ivan Villa-Renteria, Jerry Huayang Tang, Claire Tang, Fei Xia, Sil-vio Savarese, Hyowon Gweon, C. Karen Liu, Jiajun Wu, and Fei-Fei Li. BEHAVIOR-1K: A benchmark for embodied AI with 1,000 everyday activities and realistic simulation. In Pro-ceedings of the 6th Conference on Robot Learning , pages 80–93. PMLR, 2023. [10] Manling Li, Shiyu Zhao, Qineng Wang, Kangrui Wang, Yu Zhou, Sanjana Srivastava, Cem Gokmen, Tony Lee, Li Erran Li, Ruohan Zhang, Weiyu Liu, Percy Liang, Fei-Fei Li, Jiayuan Mao, and Jiajun Wu. Embodied agent interface: Benchmarking LLMs for embodied decision making. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 37, 2024. [11] Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , pages 9493–9500, 2023. [12] Andrea Micheli, Arthur Bit-Monnot, Gabriele Röger, Enrico Scala, Alessandro Valentini, Luca Framba, Alberto Rovetta, Alessandro Trapasso, Luigi Bonassi, Alfonso Emilio Gerevini, Luca Iocchi, Félix Ingrand, Uwe Köckemann, Fabio Patrizi, Alessandro Saetti, Ivan Serina, and Sebastian Stock. Unified planning: Modeling, manipulating and solving AI planning problems in python. SoftwareX , 29:102012, 2025. [13] Toby Perrett, Ahmad Darkhalil, Saptarshi Sinha, Omar Emara, Sam Pollard, Kranti Kumar Parida, Kaiting Liu, Prajwal Gatti, Siddhant Bansal, Kevin Flanagan, Jacob Chalk, Zhifan Zhu, Rhodri Guerrier, Fahd Abdelazim, Bin Zhu, Davide Moltisanti, Michael Wray, Hazel Doughty, and Dima Damen. HD-EPIC: A highly-detailed egocentric video dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 23901–23913, 2025. [14] Xavier Puig, Kevin Ra, Marko Boben, Jiaman Li, Tingwu Wang, Sanja Fidler, and Antonio Torralba. VirtualHome: Simulating household activities via programs. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 8494–8502, 2018. [15] Krishan Rana, Jesse Haviland, Sourav Garg, Jad Abou-Chakra, Ian D. Reid, and Niko Sün-derhauf. SayPlan: Grounding large language models using 3d scene graphs for scalable robot task planning. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference on Robot Learning , pages 23–72. PMLR, 2023. 11 [16] Mohit Shridhar, Jesse Thomason, Daniel Gordon, Yonatan Bisk, Winson Han, Roozbeh Mot-taghi, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Dieter Fox. ALFRED: A benchmark for interpreting grounded instructions for everyday tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 10740–10749, 2020. [17] Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay, Dieter Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. ProgPrompt: Generating situated robot task plans using large language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , pages 11523–11530, 2023. [18] Marta Skreta, Zihan Zhou, Jia Lin Yuan, Kourosh Darvish, Alán Aspuru-Guzik, and Animesh Garg. RePLan: Robotic replanning with perception and language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04157 , 2024. [19] Yale Song, Eugene Byrne, Tushar Nagarajan, Huiyu Wang, Miguel Martin, and Lorenzo Tor-resani. Ego4D goal-step: Toward hierarchical understanding of procedural activities. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, 2023. 12 Figure 2: Annotation-to-environment compilation pipeline. Raw HD-EPIC narrations are grouped into executable action groups, validated through deterministic and LLM-assisted quality control, aligned with task goals, and replayed in the simulator to produce graph-transition worlds. 

Appendix Contents 

This appendix is reorganized so that construction details, simulator protocol, metrics, additional experiments, implementation details, qualitative examples, and limitations are grouped separately. • Appendix A: Dataset Construction and Compilation Details • Appendix B: Simulator, World Rules, and Belief Protocol • Appendix C: Evaluation Metrics and Replay Protocol • Appendix D: Additional Experimental Results • Appendix E: Prompts and Agent Implementation Details • Appendix F: Qualitative Examples • Appendix G: Discussion and Limitations 

A Dataset Construction and Compilation Details 

We first collect the data-construction material so that the source annotations, compilation process, and release statistics can be read together. 

A.1 Annotation-to-Environment Compilation 

This section expands the main-paper overview by detailing how passive HD-EPIC annotations are converted into executable graph-transition samples. Figure 2 summarizes the pipeline. EGO 2W ORLD is built on HD-EPIC [13], a large-scale egocentric cooking-video dataset containing 41 hours of unscripted kitchen activity across 9 kitchens and 69 recipes. We do not introduce a new raw video corpus. Instead, we compile HD-EPIC annotations into an executable layer consisting of action groups, reusable transition rules, episode-level world graphs, task goals, and graph-transition samples. This compilation turns passive egocentric annotations into environments that support hid-den world states, partial observations, execution feedback, and replanning. 13 A.1.1 Action Grouping and Normalization 

HD-EPIC narrations are temporally dense and often too fine-grained for direct execution. We there-fore aggregate consecutive narration steps into action groups , each corresponding to an executable operation such as retrieving an object, transferring an ingredient, or producing a symbolic state change. For each video, the official narration annotations are first parsed into a keyframe mani-fest containing temporal bounds, verb–noun labels, keyframe indices, and storage-object indicators. Since full videos may exceed the context length of a single model call, we process the manifest with overlapping temporal windows and use a schema-constrained LLM procedure to group local narra-tion steps into coherent operations. Window outputs are then reconciled into a video-level group sequence. Each group records its covered source steps, temporal span, manipulated objects, normalized prim-itive actions, contextual cleanup actions, and observed or derived state changes. The simulator operates on a normalized executable action vocabulary rather than raw HD-EPIC verb classes. We map more than 300 HD-EPIC verb classes into 155 executable action types, separating linguis-tic variation from the smaller set of operations that can be checked and executed by the symbolic simulator. This mapping was constructed manually and validated against the full annotation set to ensure complete coverage of observed kitchen actions. Local reconciliation further recovers missing source-step assignments, recomputes temporal bounds, and attaches implicit contextual actions such as close or turn_off when supported by nearby evidence. 

A.1.2 Quality Control, Validation, and Task Construction 

Because LLM-generated groups may contain missing coverage, over-merged activities, unsupported state changes, or hallucinated cleanup actions, we apply a two-stage quality-control procedure. A deterministic validator first checks source-step coverage, normalized hand labels, storage interac-tions, state-change descriptors, and abnormal group structures. High-confidence structural repairs are applied automatically, while uncertain cases are placed in a review queue. An LLM reviewer then performs localized semantic review, but any revision is accepted only if it preserves the original source-step support, respects temporal order, and passes the executable action schema. This design keeps the compilation auditable: deterministic checks provide reproducible guarantees, while LLM review is restricted to bounded semantic corrections. Validated groups are then merged at the participant-scene level and aligned with high-level task structure. We match groups to HD-EPIC activity segments using temporal overlap and proximity, and enrich them with task labels and goal metadata. Goal-aligned groups are further partitioned into executable task units, where each task consists of a temporally contiguous sequence of groups serving a shared goal. A task is represented by an instruction τ and a goal predicate Φτ , and is successful when the simulator’s hidden world graph satisfies the goal condition defined in Eq. (2). 

A.1.3 Simulator Compilation 

The final stage compiles validated task annotations into executable graph-transition samples. Each normalized action group is mapped to one or more primitive simulator actions and replayed against the hidden world graph. The compiler records the pre-state, executed primitives, post-state, graph delta, and execution metadata: 

(Gwt, g t) −→ (a1: Kt , G wt+1 , ∆t, ξ t), (13) where a1: Kt denotes the primitive action sequence, ∆t records state and relation changes, and ξt

stores metadata such as success, invalidity, or skipped actions. The resulting transition dataset is 

Dtrans = {(Gwt, a 1: Kt , G wt+1 , ∆t, ξ t)}Nt=1 . (14) Although these tuples are generated from the hidden simulator state, agents do not observe the full graph during evaluation. The hidden graph is used only for execution and scoring, while agents receive partial observations and feedback. This preserves the world/belief separation required for evaluating belief maintenance and replanning under partial observation. Dataset statistics are summarized in Table 5. The compiled benchmark contains 101 videos, 9,130 action groups, and 426 goal-task instances in the compiled release. 14 A.2 Dataset and Rule-Base Statistics 

Table 5 separates full-release statistics from the evaluation subsets used in the main experiments. Table 5: E GO 2W ORLD release and evaluation-subset statistics.                                

> Property Value Notes
> Source dataset HD-EPIC (CVPR 2025) 41h, 9 kitchens, 69 recipes Compiled videos 101 Real egocentric cooking videos Compiled action groups 9,130 Executable operation groups Goal-task instances 426 Across the compiled benchmark Primitive action types 155 After normalization Verb classes covered 300+ Mapped to 155 via VERB_TO_ACTION table Transition rules 8,306 After quality control Rules validated by humans 1,247 ≈15% sample, κ= 0 .83
> Planner-backbone benchmark 299 goal tasks Seven-scene Diff-Memory comparison Main ablation subset 47 goal tasks / 12 episodes Scene 1 top-12 videos Long-horizon subset 92 goal tasks / 27 episodes All Scene 1 episodes Object instances (Scene 1 top-12) 47 Main ablation subset Action groups (Scene 1 top-12) 933 Step-level transition samples

B Simulator, World Rules, and Belief Protocol 

We next group the world-rule formalism, executable rule examples, belief-state schema, and belief-update procedure that support Sections 4–4.3. 

B.1 World Rule Formalism 

This subsection expands the compact world-rule description in Section 4.1. Each rule rk consists of a precondition set pre( rk) and an effect set eff( rk), both expressed as conjunctions of typed graph predicates over Gwt.

Preconditions specify the necessary object states, locations, and relational constraints that must hold in Gwt before the rule can fire: 

pre( rk) = ∧

> j

ϕj (Vt, Et, At) , (15) where each ϕj is an atomic predicate such as at (o, ℓ ) (object o is at area ℓ), state (o, s ) (object o

has state s), or contains (c, o ) (container c holds object o). 

Effects specify the graph mutations applied to Gwt when the rule fires: 

eff( rk) = (∆+ 

> V

, ∆− 

> V

, ∆+ 

> E

, ∆− 

> E

, ∆A

) , (16) where ∆+ 

> V

and ∆− 

> V

are node addition and deletion sets, ∆+ 

> E

and ∆− 

> E

are edge addition and deletion sets, and ∆A is a set of attribute updates. Given a skill st that the simulator expands into primitive actions, the simulator identifies the match-ing rule rk ∈ R and checks pre( rk) against Gwt. If all preconditions are satisfied, the effect is applied: 

Gwt+1 = Apply( Gwt, eff( rk)) . (17) Otherwise, the simulator returns FAIL (c) where c is the first violated predicate in pre( rk).

B.2 Transition Rule Examples 

Table 6 gives representative transition rules illustrating all four effect types. 15 Table 6: Representative transition rules from the E GO 2W ORLD rule base.                 

> Action tuple Object precond. Agent precond. Effect
> slice(cucumber, knife) state=whole hand=knife state-change :
> state ←sliced insert(capsule, machine) machine.state=open machine.loaded=false hand=capsule state-change :
> machine.loaded ←true hand ←empty brew(machine) machine.loaded=true cup.position=under hand=empty create :insert brewed_coffee in cup consume(capsule) capsule.used=true hand=capsule destroy :remove capsule node

B.3 Belief Graph Node Schema 

Each node in Gb follows this JSON schema: 

Belief graph node (JSON schema) 

{"instance_id": "cup_01", "label": "cup", "position": "coffee_area", "states": { "contains": "coffee", "amount": "full" }, "meta": { "source": "observation", "confidence": 0.95, "last_observed_step": 7 }}

B.4 Belief Graph Update 

This section gives the two-pass update procedure referenced in Section 4.2. Pass 1 Observation integration. Each symbolic delta δ ∈ Diff( Gℓt

> init

, G ℓt 

> t

) is parsed and matched to a node or edge in 

Gbt. (i) State change : if δ updates an attribute of an existing node, the corresponding attribute in Gbt

is overwritten and its metadata is set to (state_change , 1.0, t ). (ii) New object : if δ introduces an object not present in Gbt, a new node is added with metadata (state_change , 1.0, t ). (iii) Object disappearance : if δ marks an object as no longer visible in ℓt, the node’s confidence is reduced to 

ρabsent < 1 and last_observed_step is updated, but the node is not removed, as the object may reside in an unvisited area. 

Pass 2 Feedback integration. If ft = FAIL (c), the violated precondition c reveals that a specific state assumption in Gbt is incorrect. The agent resolves the contradiction by updating the relevant node attribute to a hypothesis consistent with c:

Ab(vi) ← ˆa, mi ← (action_feedback , ρ fail , t ) , (18) where ˆa is the corrected attribute value inferred from c and ρfail < 1 reflects reduced certainty. If 

ft = SUCCESS , the confidence of all nodes exercised by st is raised to 1.0.

Staleness. A belief node is flagged as stale when t − last_observed_step > ∆stale . Stale nodes are deprioritised during skill grounding but retained, as they may be refreshed when the agent revisits the corresponding functional area. 16 C Evaluation Metrics and Replay Protocol 

This section contains the metric definitions and replay-based WSR diagnostic used throughout the experiments. 

C.1 Metric Definitions 

Table 7 defines the metrics used across the main and appendix experiments. Table 7: Metric definitions.                 

> Metric Definition Used in F1 Action-level precision/recall F1 against ground-truth action types. All protocols TSR Fraction of evaluation units marked successful under the bench-mark criterion. All protocols TCR Fraction of ground-truth key actions completed within a task. All protocols WSR World-state success rate: macro changed-slot accuracy after simulator replay. Main, full LLM, long-horizon Validity Fraction of executed actions accepted by the simulator. Main, full LLM, long-horizon Replan Average number of replans triggered per evaluation unit. All protocols VLM Calls Total number of visual-model queries issued during the run. Visual protocols Cost Estimated total planner-LLM cost for the corresponding run. Full LLM

C.2 World-state replay metric (WSR) 

WSR is a final-state diagnostic, not the sole task-success measure. For each evaluation unit, we execute the ground-truth action sequence from the initial hidden world state to obtain Ggt  

> T

, and replay the predicted sequence from the same initial state to obtain ˆGT . We compare only mappable physical attributes whose values change along the ground-truth trajectory: 

Cτ = {(o, a ) | a ∈ A cmp , G gt  

> T

(o, a )̸ = G0(o, a )}, (19) where Acmp includes object location, containment, support, symbolic state, and amount. The WSR for task τ is 

WSR( τ ) = 1

|C τ |

∑

> (o,a )∈C τ

I[ ˆGT (o, a ) = Ggt  

> T

(o, a )] . (20) Invalid predicted actions leave the world graph unchanged, are counted against validity, and replay continues. In the analyses, TSR and TCR are treated as the primary completion-sensitive metrics, while WSR is interpreted as a secondary diagnostic of final-state overlap. 

D Additional Experimental Results 

We group all supplemental quantitative results here, following the diagnostic questions introduced in Section 5. 

D.1 Scene-Level LLM-Backbone Details 

Table 8 expands the aggregate planner comparison in Table 2, while Figure 3 visualizes the same planner trade-offs without occupying main-paper space. 

D.2 Main-Ablation Visualization and Granularity Robustness 

Figure 4 visualizes the main-ablation trends summarized in Table 4, while Table 9 and Figure 5 report the episode-level robustness check referenced in Section 5.1. 17 Qwen+ 

> DeepSeek
> GLM-5
> Claude
> Gemini
> GPT-5.5
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Score

Quality Metrics   

> F1 TSR TCR
> Qwen+
> DeepSeek
> GLM-5
> Claude
> Gemini
> GPT-5.5
> 0.45
> 0.50
> 0.55
> 0.60
> 0.65
> 0.70
> 0.75
> 0.80
> 0.85
> 0.90
> Score

F1 vs. Executability          

> F1 Score Validity
> 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
> VLM Calls
> 0.75
> 0.80
> 0.85
> 0.90
> 0.95
> TSR

Quality-VLM-Coverage Trade-off 

> Open
> Closed
> Qwen+
> DeepSeek
> GLM-5
> Claude
> Gemini
> GPT-5.5

Full Multikitchen Diff-Memory Planner Comparison Figure 3: Full multi-kitchen Diff-Memory planner comparison. Left: action and completion qual-ity metrics. Middle: F1 and executable validity can diverge substantially. Right: quality–VLM-coverage trade-off across open-weight and closed-source planner families. Table 8: Scene-level details for the completed LLM-backbone runs under the fixed Diff-Memory configuration. 

Planner LLM Scene / Video block Episodes Goal Tasks Groups F1 TSR TCR WSR Valid Replan Qwen-Plus scene1 7 33 617 0.7317 0.8485 0.6962 0.9352 0.6919 0.8429 scene2 5 21 309 0.6665 0.7143 0.4893 0.9529 0.6843 1.0348 scene3 4 17 249 0.7654 0.8824 0.7446 0.9468 0.6131 1.0820 scene4 5 33 505 0.7465 0.8485 0.7513 0.9660 0.6661 0.9743 scene5 5 8 206 0.7115 0.7500 0.6026 0.8919 0.6345 1.2113 scene6 5 11 554 0.8154 0.9091 0.8577 0.9695 0.6756 0.9094 scene7 5 17 465 0.7372 0.9412 0.7312 0.9529 0.6640 1.0443 DeepSeek-V4-Flash scene1 7 33 617 0.8860 1.0000 0.8888 0.9351 0.5943 0.6417 scene2 4 21 309 0.7591 0.8571 0.7330 0.9517 0.5635 0.5956 scene3 2 9 121 0.8192 1.0000 0.8768 0.9440 0.5807 0.7600 scene4 4 27 366 0.8587 1.0000 0.8768 0.9625 0.5652 0.5904 scene5 5 8 206 0.8796 1.0000 0.9026 0.8929 0.5225 0.8284 scene6 4 8 476 0.9252 1.0000 0.9688 0.9713 0.5965 0.5312 scene7 3 11 249 0.8981 0.9091 0.8830 0.9520 0.5876 0.6126 Heuristic     

> UP Closed
> Flow
> Feedback Flow
> Memory Diff
> Feedback Diff
> Explore Diff
> Memory

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0      

> F1
> 0.801
> 0.865
> 0.768 0.773
> 0.726
> 0.796
> 0.760
> Heuristic
> UP Closed
> Flow
> Feedback Flow
> Memory Diff
> Feedback Diff
> Explore Diff
> Memory

0.00 

0.05 

0.10 

0.15 

0.20 

0.25 

0.30 

0.35 

0.40      

> WSR
> 0.239
> 0.308 0.321
> 0.352
> 0.304
> 0.342
> 0.289
> Heuristic
> UP Closed
> Flow
> Feedback Flow
> Memory Diff
> Feedback Diff
> Explore Diff
> Memory

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8   

> TCR
> 0.609 0.579
> 0.754 0.731
> 0.663
> 0.772
> 0.723
> Scene 1 top-12 videos · Goal-task granularity · Best values marked with ///

Figure 4: Main ablation on Scene 1 top-12. F1, WSR, and TCR rank agents differently, showing that action overlap, completion, and final-state correctness measure distinct capabilities. 18 Table 9: Main ablation under goal-task and episode-level reporting. 

Planner Goal F1 Goal WSR Goal TCR Epi F1 Epi WSR Epi TCR Heuristic 0.8010 0.2388 0.6089 0.8087 0.2717 0.6510 UP Closed 0.8648 0.3085 0.5786 0.8700 0.2880 0.5911 Flow-Feedback 0.7676 0.3209 0.7543 0.7694 0.2755 0.7865 Flow-Memory 0.7726 0.3523 0.7312 0.7818 0.2900 0.7489 Diff-Feedback 0.7260 0.3041 0.6627 0.7362 0.2678 0.6954 Diff-Explore 0.7963 0.3423 0.7721 0.8055 0.2709 0.7968 

Diff-Memory 0.7605 0.2892 0.7230 0.7706 0.2771 0.7659 0.200 0.225 0.250 0.275 0.300 0.325 0.350 0.375 0.400      

> WSR @ Goal-task
> 0.200
> 0.225
> 0.250
> 0.275
> 0.300
> 0.325
> 0.350
> 0.375
> 0.400
> WSR @ Episode
> Heuristic
> UP Closed
> Flow-Feedback
> Flow-Memory
> Diff-Feedback Diff-Explore
> Diff-Memory
> 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70 0.75 0.80
> TCR @ Goal-task
> 0.55
> 0.60
> 0.65
> 0.70
> 0.75
> 0.80
> TCR @ Episode
> Heuristic
> UP Closed
> Flow-Feedback
> Flow-Memory
> Diff-Feedback
> Diff-Explore
> Diff-Memory

Figure 5: Granularity robustness for WSR and TCR. Rankings remain stable when moving from goal-task to episode-level evaluation. 

D.3 Pure LLM Baselines and Executable Reference Gap 

This subsection addresses the third and fourth diagnostic questions introduced in Section 5. We next evaluate whether E GO 2W ORLD can be solved by simple LLM prompting without an ex-plicit belief-state interface. LLM-PlanOnly receives the task instruction, the initial local obser-vation, and the action schema, and emits a complete action sequence in one shot. It receives no execution feedback. LLM-Reactive receives local observations and success/failure feedback dur-ing execution, and replans step by step, but it does not maintain an explicit persistent belief graph. We compare both against the memory-enabled reference agent on the full Scene 1 task set of 27 episodes and 92 goal tasks. Table 10 shows that feedback alone is useful: LLM-Reactive substantially improves over LLM-PlanOnly on TSR and TCR. However, the belief-memory agent remains much stronger on completion-sensitive metrics. Notably, LLM-Reactive achieves higher action F1 than the belief-memory agent, but much lower TSR and TCR. This is a key diagnostic result: a planner can produce plausible local actions while failing to complete the executable task. The high WSR values of both LLM-only baselines also show why WSR must be read cautiously; unchanged or coarsely over-lapping world slots can make final-state overlap appear high even when the intended manipulation sequence is incomplete. Figure 6 visualizes both this LLM-only diagnostic and the direct graph-synthesis audit from Section 5.3. To estimate remaining headroom, we compare practical agents with stronger executable reference conditions. GT-Replay replays the compiled ground-truth primitive chain. Hidden-World Upper Bound is a conservative executable reference that uses task-aligned compiled chains under full hidden world-state access. It should not be interpreted as a separately optimized symbolic planner; rather, it provides a reference point for the current compiled transition protocol. Table 11 shows a large gap between practical agents and the executable references. Belief-Memory improves substantially over No-Memory on F1, TSR, and TCR, but remains below the executable 19 Table 10: Pure LLM baselines on the full Scene 1 task set. Reactive feedback improves over one-shot planning, but persistent belief memory remains strongest on completion-sensitive metrics. 

Agent Memory Feedback F1 TSR TCR WSR Valid Replan LLM-PlanOnly – – 0.7174 0.4348 0.1916 0.9940 0.8348 0.0000 LLM-Reactive – ✓ 0.8181 0.6413 0.5304 0.9937 0.7192 29.0000 Belief-Memory ✓ ✓ 0.7726 0.8936 0.7312 0.9268 0.6840 0.8675 LLM-PlanOnly LLM-Reactive Belief-Memory        

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Score
> WSR is shown as a lighter hatched bar because it is a secondary diagnostic, not the primary completion metric.
> E1: LLM-Only Baselines on Scene1 Full
> F1 TSR TCR WSR Direct LLM-Graph Direct LLM-Graph + Self-Check Ours Compiler
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Rate
> Higher is better for Coverage and Replay success; lower is better for Hallucination.
> E2: Direct LLM Graph Generation Audit
> Coverage Hallucination Replay success

Figure 6: Additional diagnostics. Left: pure LLM baselines compared with the belief-memory agent. WSR is shown as a secondary diagnostic because TSR and TCR are more completion-sensitive in this setting. Right: direct LLM graph synthesis lacks the source grounding and replayability of the compiler-grounded construction. Table 11: Executable reference gap on Scene 1 top-12. The hidden-world row is a conservative executable reference, not a separately optimized symbolic oracle. 

Agent State access F1 TSR TCR WSR Valid Replan GT-Replay GT actions 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.5886 0.0000 Hidden-World Upper Bound Full Gw 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 0.5886 0.0000 Belief-Memory Belief Gb 0.7726 0.8936 0.7312 0.9268 0.6840 0.8675 No-Memory Local obs. 0.4011 0.6809 0.3235 0.9274 0.6149 0.8511 

upper bound. This confirms that the benchmark is not saturated. The gap reflects both partial observability and the difficulty of maintaining and using belief state for grounded execution. The validity values in the reference rows should be read carefully. Validity is computed at the primitive-action level under strict simulator preconditions. A reference chain can reach the compiled task endpoint while still containing primitive steps counted as invalid by this diagnostic. We retain this metric because it exposes rule-level strictness rather than hiding it behind task-level success. 

D.4 Memory-Type Detail 

Figure 7 and Table 12 provide the directly comparable Panel B memory variants. Table 12: Memory-type ablation Panel B: directly comparable memory variants at goal-task and episode granularity. 

Granularity Variant Prec Rec F1 TSR TCR Replan Goal-task Graph only 0.6495 0.7402 0.6765 0.7647 0.5530 0.9745 Chain only 0.6740 0.7608 0.7045 0.8235 0.5979 0.9717 Full memory 0.6591 0.7754 0.7051 0.8824 0.6207 0.8239 

Episode Graph only 0.7037 0.8089 0.7402 0.8405 0.6672 1.1438 Chain only 0.7170 0.8446 0.7683 0.9071 0.7392 1.0726 Full memory 0.7282 0.8389 0.7729 0.9357 0.7254 0.9357 

20 Precision Recall F1 TSR TCR Replan                

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Score
> 0.649 0.740
> 0.676 0.765
> 0.553
> 0.975
> 0.674 0.761
> 0.705 0.824
> 0.598
> 0.972
> 0.659 0.775
> 0.705
> 0.882
> 0.621
> 0.824
> Goal-task
> Precision Recall F1 TSR TCR Replan
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Score
> 0.704 0.809
> 0.740 0.841
> 0.667
> 1.144
> 0.717 0.845
> 0.768 0.907
> 0.739
> 1.073
> 0.728 0.839
> 0.773
> 0.936
> 0.725
> 0.936
> Episode
> Graph only
> Chain only
> Full
> Graph only
> Chain only
> Full

Figure 7: Goal-task and episode-level comparison of graph-only, chain-only, and full memory. Full memory gives the most stable overall behavior. No      

> memory
> Graph
> only
> Chain
> only
> Full
> memory
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> F1
> 0.573
> 0.676
> 0.705 0.705
> No
> memory
> Graph
> only
> Chain
> only
> Full
> memory
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> TSR
> 0.197
> 0.765
> 0.824
> 0.882
> No
> memory
> Graph
> only
> Chain
> only
> Full
> memory
> 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> TCR
> 0.189
> 0.553
> 0.598
> 0.621
> No
> memory
> Graph
> only
> Chain
> only
> Full
> memory
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Replan  0.596
> 0.975 0.972
> 0.824
> No memory Graph only Chain only Full memory

Figure 8: Memory-type ablation on Scene 1 top-7. Persistent memory improves completion metrics over the no-memory condition, while different memory forms emphasize different aspects of plan-ning. 

D.5 Memory-Type Ablation and Statistical Reliability 

This subsection groups the memory ablation and paired-bootstrap reliability checks. Table 13 and Figure 8 compare memory variants on the Scene 1 top-7 split. The no-memory con-dition retains some action overlap but performs poorly on completion-sensitive metrics. Chain-only memory outperforms graph-only memory when used alone, suggesting that action history is espe-cially useful under partial observation. Full memory gives the strongest goal-task TSR and TCR among the memory variants and is also the most stable at episode level. To avoid overclaiming memory effects, we perform paired-bootstrap tests. Table 14 shows that the memory advantages observed elsewhere in the paper are directionally consistent but not statistically significant under paired-bootstrap testing. Full memory improves several goal-task metrics relative to graph-only memory, including F1 and TSR, but the corresponding confidence intervals still cross zero. The long-horizon comparisons are even weaker, with only small deltas at the session level. We do not interpret this as evidence that memory is unimportant. Rather, it suggests that the current benchmark regime retains substantial variance across tasks and episodes, so that memory contributes real but non-uniform gains. This is aligned with the role of E GO 2W ORLD as a diagnostic benchmark: it exposes capability trends and failure modes, but does not collapse them into a single overconfident significance claim. 21 Table 13: Memory-type ablation on Scene 1 top-7. Panel A includes the no-memory aggregate; Panel B compares graph-only, chain-only, and full-memory variants at goal-task and episode granu-larity. 

Panel A: shared aggregate summary 

Variant Graph Mem Chain Mem F1 TSR TCR Replan No memory – – 0.5731 0.1967 0.1885 0.5956 

Graph only ✓ – 0.6765 0.7647 0.5530 0.9745 Chain only – ✓ 0.7045 0.8235 0.5979 0.9717 Full memory ✓ ✓ 0.7051 0.8824 0.6207 0.8239                                            

> Panel B: directly comparable memory variants
> Granularity Variant Prec. Rec. F1 TSR TCR Replan Goal-task Graph only 0.6495 0.7402 0.6765 0.7647 0.5530 0.9745 Chain only 0.6740 0.7608 0.7045 0.8235 0.5979 0.9717 Full memory 0.6591 0.7754 0.7051 0.8824 0.6207 0.8239
> Episode Graph only 0.7037 0.8089 0.7402 0.8405 0.6672 1.1438 Chain only 0.7170 0.8446 0.7683 0.9071 0.7392 1.0726 Full memory 0.7282 0.8389 0.7729 0.9357 0.7254 0.9357

Table 14: Paired-bootstrap tests for memory effects. Deltas are treatment minus baseline. Current sample sizes reveal directional trends but not statistically significant differences. 

Comparison Metric Delta 95% CI p

Full vs. Graph-only F1 +0.0285 [-0.0111, 0.0683] 0.1692 Full vs. Graph-only TSR +0.1176 [-0.0817, 0.2941] 0.2466 Full vs. Graph-only TCR +0.0677 [-0.0660, 0.1982] 0.3252 Full vs. Graph-only Replan -0.1506 [-0.4722, 0.1612] 0.3548 Full vs. Chain-only F1 +0.0006 [-0.0505, 0.0537] 0.9780 Full vs. Chain-only TSR +0.0588 [-0.2353, 0.3529] 0.7104 Full vs. Chain-only TCR +0.0228 [-0.2318, 0.2797] 0.8640 Full vs. Chain-only Replan -0.1478 [-0.4917, 0.1930] 0.4140 Full vs. No-memory, long-horizon Task F1 +0.0219 [-0.0511, 0.0988] 0.5552 Full vs. No-memory, long-horizon Task TSR -0.0426 [-0.1915, 0.1064] 0.5968 Full vs. No-memory, long-horizon Task TCR -0.0333 [-0.1158, 0.0447] 0.4402 Full vs. No-memory, long-horizon Session WSR -0.0004 [-0.0013, 0.0000] 0.7098 

D.6 Long-Horizon VLM Call Analysis 

Figure 9 isolates the visual-query behavior that complements the long-horizon aggregate results in Appendix D.7. 

D.7 Long Horizons 

This subsection reports the continuous-execution protocol that complements the VLM-call analysis in Appendix D.6. 

Setup. Long-horizon evaluation differs from goal-task evaluation in two ways. First, the hidden world state is not reset between tasks within the same episode. Second, tasks are executed in their ground-truth temporal order, so earlier observations and earlier mistakes can affect later tasks. We compare three memory regimes: No memory , which disables cross-task object-memory accumu-lation; Constrained memory , which retains a bounded object memory with selective forgetting; and Full memory , which retains all accumulated objects without forgetting. All regimes start each episode with empty memory and the same initial world state. Thus, the first task position is a phase-22 1 2 3 4 5

Task Position in Session 

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

> VLM Calls (mean)

n=12 

n=11 

n=10 

n=5 

n=4 

VLM Call Reduction Over Task Sequence (Horizon 10) 

Full memory 

No memory (0 calls) 

1 2 3 4 5

Task Position in Session 

0.0 

0.1 

0.2 

0.3 

0.4 

0.5 

0.6 

> F1

F1 Comparison by Task Position 

No memory 

Full memory Figure 9: Long-horizon VLM-call analysis. Full memory reduces VLM calls across early task positions while improving early-position F1. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

Task Position in Session 

0.00 

0.20 

0.40 

0.60 

0.80 

1.00     

> Task Success Rate (TSR)
> n=48 n=38
> n=23
> n=17
> n=14
> n=13
> n=38
> n=31
> n=23
> n=17 n=14 n=13
> n=13
> n=38
> n=31
> n=23
> n=17 n=14
> n=13
> n=13

No Memory 

Constrained (max=20) 

Full Memory (unlimited) 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

Task Position in Session 

0.00 

0.10 

0.20 

0.30 

0.40 

0.50 

0.60 

0.70 

> Action F1 Score

No Memory 

Constrained (max=20) 

Full Memory (unlimited) 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

Task Position in Session 

0.00 

0.10 

0.20 

0.30 

0.40 

0.50 

0.60 

> Task Completion Ratio (TCR)

No Memory 

Constrained (max=20) 

Full Memory (unlimited) 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

Task Position in Session 

0.88 

0.90 

0.92 

0.94 

0.96 

0.98 

1.00 

> Goal Achievement (GA)

No Memory 

Constrained (max=20) 

Full Memory (unlimited) 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

Task Position in Session 

0.00 

2.00 

4.00 

6.00 

8.00 

10.00 

12.00 

> VLM Calls

No Memory 

Constrained (max=20) 

Full Memory (unlimited) 

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

Task Position in Session 

0.00 

0.50 

1.00 

1.50 

2.00 

2.50 

3.00 

3.50 

> Replan Count

No Memory 

Constrained (max=20) 

Full Memory (unlimited) 

Long-Horizon Memory Growth: Three Memory Configurations (Position 1 8, n=48) 

Scene1 + Scene3 | Shaded area = ±1 std | n = 48(P1), 38(P2), 31(P3), 23(P4), 17(P5), 14(P6), 13(P7), 13(P8) 

Figure 10: Long-horizon memory-growth analysis on the combined Scene 1 and Scene 3 evaluation set. All variants start each episode from empty memory. Memory-enabled variants substantially reduce VLM calls after the first task, but lower visual-query cost does not necessarily imply higher task completion. 0 regime in which memory-enabled variants have no accumulated-memory advantage. Figure 10 summarizes how memory size, VLM calls, and completion metrics evolve across task positions. We evaluate E GO 2W ORLD under a long-horizon protocol in which tasks are executed sequentially within the same episode following their ground-truth temporal order, without resetting the hidden 23 Table 15: Long-horizon evaluation on the combined Scene 1 and Scene 3 set (48 episodes, 197 tasks per configuration, positions 1–8). Tasks are executed in temporal order without resetting the hidden world state between tasks. 

Mode TSR F1 TCR GA Valid Replan VLM/Task Objects No memory 0.452 0.399 0.275 0.944 0.744 0.81 8.0 0.0 Diff 0.457 0.396 0.269 0.944 0.743 0.73 3.6 19.0 Flow 0.452 0.386 0.267 0.944 0.775 0.63 3.5 45.8 

Table 16: Position-wise long-horizon summary. Values report mean task F1 and mean VLM calls at each task position over the combined Scene 1 and Scene 3 evaluation set. Later positions have fewer samples and should be interpreted cautiously. 

Pos. n F1 No F1 Diff F1 Flow VLM No VLM Diff VLM Flow 

1 48 0.40 0.37 0.38 7.4 7.4 7.4 2 38 0.41 0.36 0.38 7.9 2.4 3.2 3 31 0.46 0.40 0.36 7.9 2.5 2.8 4 23 0.36 0.41 0.38 8.0 1.8 1.2 

5 17 0.40 0.37 0.37 8.7 1.2 1.2 6 14 0.36 0.50 0.43 9.1 2.6 2.6 7 13 0.29 0.47 0.38 7.8 2.9 1.5 

8 13 0.45 0.40 0.49 8.8 4.2 2.3 

world state between tasks. This setting tests cross-task memory reuse and error propagation, two capabilities that are not captured by passive video prediction or independently evaluated goal-task benchmarks. The evaluation covers two scene types: Scene 1, which contains relatively simple coffee, juice, and dishwashing activities, and Scene 3, which contains more complex cooking procedures with ingredient preparation and intermediate products. In total, we evaluate 48 episodes and 197 tasks per configuration over task positions 1–8. We compare three memory regimes: No memory , which disables cross-task object memory; Diff , which uses bounded memory with at most 20 objects and a 10% forgetting rate; and Flow , which uses unbounded memory without forgetting. Table 15 reports the aggregate results. Both memory-enabled variants substantially reduce visual exploration: VLM calls drop from 8.0 per task under No memory to 3.6 under Diff and 3.5 under Flow. However, planning quality does not increase monotonically with memory size. Diff achieves the highest TSR, Flow achieves the highest validity and lowest replanning rate, while No memory slightly leads on F1 and TCR. This indicates that long-horizon performance depends not only on memory capacity, but also on memory selection and noise control. Table 16 summarizes the position-wise dynamics. At position 1, all configurations use the same number of VLM calls because each episode starts from empty memory. From position 2 onward, memory-enabled variants reuse previously observed objects and sharply reduce visual queries, es-pecially around positions 4–5. Later positions contain fewer episodes and therefore exhibit higher variance. These results reveal a memory quality–quantity trade-off. In the simpler Scene 1 setting, unbounded memory can effectively replace repeated visual exploration. In the more complex Scene 3 setting, however, intermediate products and visually similar ingredients introduce noisy or stale memory en-tries, increasing grounding ambiguity. Bounded memory therefore offers a more stable compromise: it reduces visual exploration while limiting the accumulation of irrelevant objects. Overall, the long-horizon protocol demonstrates that E GO 2W ORLD can evaluate cross-task infor-mation reuse beyond independent task execution. Memory reduces visual queries, but does not automatically improve plan quality. Robust long-horizon planning requires not only memory accu-mulation, but also memory selection, forgetting, and error correction. 24 D.8 Benchmark Implications 

This subsection summarizes the diagnostic implications of the full experimental suite. Across the construction audits, planner-backbone comparison, LLM-only baselines, reference-gap analysis, main ablations, memory comparisons, and long-horizon study, E GO 2W ORLD exposes ca-pabilities that a static action-prediction benchmark would obscure. First, direct LLM graph generation is not a reliable substitute for compiler-grounded video-to-world construction: it hallucinates unsupported symbolic content and rarely produces replayable transi-tions. Second, pure LLM planners are strong local baselines, especially with reactive feedback, but they remain substantially weaker than belief-memory agents on completion-sensitive metrics. Third, the executable reference conditions show that the benchmark is far from saturated. Fourth, action F1, TSR, TCR, WSR, validity, replanning, and visual-query cost measure different capabilities and should not be collapsed into a single score. Fifth, memory improves several completion-oriented trends but the paired-bootstrap results argue for cautious rather than overconfident statistical claims. Sixth, long-horizon execution reveals that memory growth must be controlled: storing more infor-mation can reduce visual exploration, but stale memory and error propagation can still limit session-level completion. 

Implications for agent design. These results suggest three concrete directions for future embod-ied agent research. First, belief representations matter more than action vocabulary : agents with persistent memory achieve substantially higher task completion than those with comparable action F1, suggesting that research effort should shift from action prediction toward belief maintenance architectures. Second, validity and completion are independent optimisation targets : Claude Sonnet 4.6 achieves the highest executable validity while ranking lower on F1, while DeepSeek-V4-Flash leads on completion with weaker validity, indicating that future planners should be explicitly co-optimised for both local executability and global task completion rather than treating one as a proxy for the other. Third, memory selection dominates memory capacity in long-horizon set-tings : unbounded memory reduces visual queries but does not outperform bounded memory on task completion, pointing to forgetting and uncertainty-aware retrieval as underexplored design axes for embodied memory systems. 

E Prompts and Agent Implementation Details 

This section groups prompt templates and the VLM exploration protocol, which are implementation details rather than standalone experimental findings. 

E.1 Agent Prompt Templates 

This section groups the prompt templates used by the compiler and repair components. We use the same LLM prompt template (Qwen-Plus) across all LLM-based agent configurations, varying only the observation interface (Flow vs. Diff) and the memory mode. The prompt is struc-tured as a single-shot request for a short action plan starting from the current state; no chain-of-thought is used at invocation time. All prompts enforce strict-JSON output only. 

E.1.1 Planner Prompt Template (LLM Compiler) 

The following template is used for high-level task planning in both Flow-Feedback, Flow-Memory, Diff-Feedback, Diff-Explore, and Diff-Memory agents. The context dict contains the current agent position, hand state, known objects restricted to the current functional area, completed step summary, state delta since episode start, and feedback history. 25 Planner prompt (LLM compiler) 

You are a step-by-step action planner for a text-based kitchen simulator. Your job: given the CURRENT STATE and a GOAL, output the MINIMUM number of actions needed to achieve the goal FROM THE CURRENT STATE. Rules: - Start from the current agent position and hand state -- do NOT repeat actions already done. - Generate ONLY the actions needed right now, not a full task walkthrough. - If the agent is already holding the object, skip go_to and pick_up. - If the object is already in the right place, skip placement steps. - Use object/target names from the scene context. Do not invent names. - Prefer fewer steps over completeness -- stop as soon as the goal is achieved. Available action types: go_to, pick_up, take_out, place, put_in, open, close, turn_on, turn_off, wait, wash, move, transfer, add, cut, pour, retrieve, throw, discard, dispose, store, clean, dry, wrap, cover, uncover, insert, load, unload, empty, fill, press, activate, adjust, reposition, position, turn, knead, roll, fold, blend, grind, crush, sprinkle, spread, coat, season, peel, grate, slice, scoop, drain, mix, stir, juice, extract, assemble, disassemble, attach, detach, unplug, plug_in, carry, lift, write, measure, weigh, read, eat, drink, taste, smell, wear, unwear, unlock, lock, separate, divide, distribute, serve, break, shake, search, squeeze, apply, operate, unfold, set, rub, unpack, collect, screw, pat, form, unroll, pith, setup, brush, process, pit, soak, rearrange, clap, hang, tear, drop, record, test, reach, correct, clear, consolidate, create, tap, lower, scratch, reset, hold, crumple, gather, return, relocate, scrape, pull, scrub, wipe, lather, arrange, sort, attempt, pack, finish, touch, get, crumble, stretch, start, stop, feel, look. Current state: {current_region}. Holding: left={left_hand}, right={right_hand}. {completed_steps_summary} {state_delta_block} Scene context: {json.dumps(known_objects, ensure_ascii=False)} Goal: {goal_text} Schema: {json.dumps(schema_hint, ensure_ascii=False)} Return strict JSON only. 

The schema_hint prescribes the output format: 

{"goal": "<goal text>", "steps": [{"action_type": "...", "object": "...", "target": "...", "steps": 1, "reason": "short explanation"}, ...], "notes": "brief note"} 

In the Diff interface, an additional state_delta block is appended whenever the world graph has changed since episode start: 

State-delta block (Diff interface only) 

State changes since episode start: {Delta(G_init, G_current) as rendered text} 

E.1.2 Feedback Prompt Template (LLM Feedback / Repair) 

When an action fails validation, the following template is used to generate corrected feedback and a replacement action: 26 Repair prompt (LLM feedback) 

> You are a kitchen simulator planner. An action just failed validation. Goal: {goal_text} Failed action: action_type: {action_type} object: {object} target: {target} Validation failure reasons: {reasons_str} Available in this episode: storages: {storages} appliances: {appliances} objects: {objects[:30]}{" ..." if len(objects) > 30 else ""} Your task: produce a SINGLE corrected action that fixes the validation failure. - action_type must be one of: go_to, open, close, pick_up, take_out, place, put_in, turn_on, turn_off, wait - If the failed action was fundamentally wrong (wrong object/target), choose a different valid action that still serves the goal. - If the failure is about agent position, use go_to first. - If the failure is about a storage being closed, add open before the action. - Do NOT invent object names not in the available list. - Do NOT use appliances as put_in targets (use storages like drawer, cupboard, bin). Return JSON: {"corrected_action": {"action_type": "...", "object": "...", "target": "..."}, "feedback": "short explanation of what was wrong and what you changed"} Return strict JSON only, no markdown.

The corrected action is re-submitted to the simulator; up to three repair attempts are allowed before the agent falls back to a replan from scratch. 

E.2 VLM Anchor Discovery Protocol 

This protocol specifies when and how VLM exploration updates the agent-side belief graph. When the agent’s belief graph contains insufficient information to ground a planned action, the VLM exploration protocol is triggered. This occurs when the target object is not in the current functional area and has confidence below 0.6. 

Step 1: Anchor selection. The agent maintains a catalog of functional-area anchor images (anchor_catalog_v2.json ), each covering one region of the kitchen. The VLM is queried for the anchor corresponding to the object’s likely location, based on the object’s label and a prior dis-tribution over areas. 

Step 2: VLM query. The VLM receives the anchor image and a structured prompt: 

"Describe all visible objects in this image. For each object, report its label, approximate position, e.g., shelf level, and any relevant state, e.g., open, closed, or contains X." 

Step 3: Belief update. The VLM response is parsed into belief nodes with 

source="vlm_exploration" and confidence=0.85 , calibrated against human validation on a held-out set of 50 anchor images. 

F Qualitative Examples 

This section groups qualitative traces after the quantitative appendix results. 27 F.1 Additional Qualitative Examples 

The traces below illustrate representative execution and memory behavior behind the aggregate re-sults. We present two full episode traces illustrating belief error accumulation, replan events, and the world/belief graph comparison. 

F.1.1 Episode trace: Diff-Explore agent, group “make coffee” Episode: P01_20240202_110250, Group: 7 (make coffee), Interface: Diff, Agent: Diff-Explore. 

Belief at step 0 (initial observation). The agent observes the coffee area and builds an initial belief graph. Only the current functional area ( coffee_area ) is disclosed; the agent does not know the contents of the refrigerator or the storage cabinet. 

Initial belief graph Gb0 

> Nodes: cup_01: label=cup position=coffee_area confidence=0.92 last_observed_step=0 capsule_01: label=capsule position=? (not visible) confidence=0.40 last_observed_step=? coffee_machine: label=coffee_machine position=coffee_area state=closed confidence=0.99 last_observed_step=0 Edges: cup_01 --located_in--> coffee_area coffee_machine --located_in--> coffee_area Meta: capsule_01.last_observed_step = None capsule_01 has low confidence; agent must explore.

Hidden world graph Gw0 (simulator only) 

> Nodes: cup_01: label=cup position=coffee_area capsule_01: label=capsule position=storage_cabinet coffee_machine: label=coffee_machine position=coffee_area state=closed capsule_02: label=capsule position=storage_cabinet agent has no way to learn about capsule_02 yet Edges: capsule_01 --in--> storage_cabinet capsule_02 --in--> storage_cabinet

Action sequence and belief updates. Step 1. 

Agent plans open(coffee_machine) . The precondition is satisfied, and the world and belief graphs both update to state=open . VLM is not called. Feedback: success. The state of 

coffee_machine is updated in Gb1 .28 Step 2. 

Agent plans insert(capsule, coffee_machine) . The agent’s belief has 

capsule_01.position = ? because the capsule is unobserved. The object is not in the current region, so the agent’s prompt field known_objects does not contain it. The action fails because capsule_01 is not visible in coffee_area .

Step 3 (replan). 

Agent receives the failure signal fail(capsule_01 not in current region) . The Diff interface also provides a world-diff diagnostic: the target state of the group requires 

coffee_machine.loaded = true , which the agent can only achieve by inserting a capsule. The agent calls the VLM to query the storage-cabinet anchor image. The VLM returns that capsule_01 

is visible on the second shelf of the storage cabinet. The agent updates Gb with a new node: capsule_01 , whose label is capsule , position is 

storage_cabinet , confidence is 0.88, and last_observed_step is 3. 

Step 4. 

Agent plans a sub-sequence: go_to(storage_cabinet) , take_out(capsule_01, storage_cabinet) , go_to(coffee_area) , and insert(capsule_01, coffee_machine) .All actions succeed. Gb4 now reflects that coffee_machine.loaded = true .

Step 5. 

Agent plans place(cup_01, under_dispenser) . The action succeeds: cup_01.position ←

under_dispenser .

Step 6. 

Agent plans turn_on(coffee_machine) . The precondition machine.loaded = true is satis-fied. The world state is updated, and Gb6 reflects coffee_machine.power = on .

Step 7. 

Agent plans wait(30s) . The action succeeds. Brewed coffee appears in the cup. Gb7 is updated by the state-delta observation: cup_01.contains = brewed_coffee and cup_01.amount = full .The Diff interface provides that cup_01 now contains coffee with amount=full .

Group complete. 

Gw7 and Gb7 are compared. The world-state success rate for this group is 1.0, and one VLM call was made. The key observation is that the belief graph was incomplete at step 2 ( capsule_01 was unobserved), causing a local failure. The agent recovered by using VLM exploration to acquire the missing node, updating its belief, and completing the plan. The Diff interface’s world-diff signal focused the replan on the unfulfilled goal predicate rather than on arbitrary next actions. 

F.1.2 Episode trace: Flow-Memory agent, long-horizon session Episode: P01_20240202_110250, Session: 3 consecutive goal tasks, Interface: Flow, Agent: 

Flow-Memory. 

Memory state after task 1 (prepare coffee). After completing the coffee task, the agent’s Explo-rationMemory contains: 

Anchor: storage_cabinet_anchor.jpg - capsule_01: confidence=0.88, position=storage_cabinet_shelf_2 - capsule_02: confidence=0.75, position=storage_cabinet_shelf_1 Anchor: coffee_area_anchor.jpg - cup_01: confidence=0.99, position=coffee_area_counter - coffee_machine: state=open, loaded=true (from task 1) - brewed_coffee_in_cup: confidence=0.95 

The memory is persistent across task boundaries within the session. 

Task 2 (prepare orange juice): failure and recovery. At the start of task 2, the agent’s belief graph is initialized from the initial observation. This is a fresh start because the Flow interface resets the belief at each task. However, the ExplorationMemory retains the anchors from task 1. 29 The agent plans: go_to(fridge) , take_out(orange_juice, fridge) . The VLM is consulted to find the fridge anchor image. The memory confirms that the fridge anchor was not previously ob-served ( confidence = 0.0 ), so a fresh VLM call is made. The VLM returns that orange_juice 

is on the middle shelf of the refrigerator, next to milk_cartons .The agent updates Gb with: orange_juice: label=orange_juice, position=fridge, confidence=0.91 . The plan proceeds to extract the orange juice and pour it into a glass. The key observation is that the fridge anchor is stored in ExplorationMemory after this call, reducing future VLM cost. 

Task 3 (boil kettle, add water to coffee): memory reuse. For task 3, the agent needs to access the kettle in the upper cabinet. The ExplorationMemory already has the 

upper_cabinet anchor from a prior observation in the same episode, because task 1 ex-plored this area to retrieve a cup. The memory entry reads: kettle_01: confidence=0.82, position=upper_cabinet . No VLM call is issued. The agent uses the memory entry to plan directly: go_to(upper_cabinet) , take_out(kettle_01, upper_cabinet) , go_to(sink) ,and fill(kettle_01, sink) . VLM call count for task 3 is 0, indicating a memory hit. VLM calls for task 1, task 2, and task 3 are 4, 2, and 0, respectively. The exploration-memory system reduces total VLM calls from an estimated 10+ in the no-memory baseline to 6. 

Error accumulation. At step 8 of task 3, the agent attempts to place the kettle on the stove. How-ever, the kettle was last observed in the upper cabinet; during task 3, the agent moved it to the sink to fill it. The belief graph has kettle_01.position = sink , but the agent’s plan incor-rectly assumes that the kettle is still in the upper cabinet, reflecting a stale memory entry. The action 

take_out(kettle_01, upper_cabinet) fails: “ kettle_01 not in upper_cabinet ; current po-sition is sink ”. The agent replans: go_to(sink) , take_out(kettle_01, sink) , and then continues. The stale memory entry is flagged and the position is updated to sink with confidence = 0.95 . This demonstrates that even persistent memory is subject to staleness in long-horizon sessions, and the repair mechanism in Section E.1.2 is essential for recovery. 

G Discussion and Limitations 

This section collects limitations and scope clarifications after the construction, protocol, and experi-mental appendices. Ego2World uses a symbolic graph representation and does not simulate continuous physics, photo-realistic rendering, or low-level visual perception. This is a deliberate design choice: the benchmark isolates belief maintenance, state-change reasoning, and replanning from perception noise. A fu-ture version could connect the same world/belief protocol to a photorealistic front-end or a robotic simulator. 

Goal-state derivation and replay reference. Goal states are derived by executing ground-truth sequences on a clean world graph. This makes evaluation executable and reproducible, but it also means that the current replay-based evaluator remains partly reference-driven. Some semantically acceptable alternative plans may receive less credit if they do not align well with the compiled ref-erence trajectory. Future versions could adopt a more expressive formal goal language to represent broader equivalence classes of valid end states. 

Subjectivity of cooking procedures. Cooking admits multiple valid execution orders and ingredi-ent substitutions. E GO 2W ORLD evaluates agents against compiled ground-truth trajectories, which means semantically equivalent but reordered plans may receive partial rather than full credit. We partially mitigate this by using completion-sensitive metrics (TSR, TCR) that credit key-action cov-erage rather than exact sequence match, and by computing WSR over changed physical slots rather than action identity. Quantifying the full space of valid alternative plans—for example by adopting a partial-order task representation—is left for future work. 30 Human-reference assumption. EGO 2W ORLD uses compiled human demonstrations as the refer-ence trajectory for both rule extraction and goal-state derivation. This implicitly assumes that human execution order is a valid target for embodied agents. In practice, an agent may achieve the same physical outcome through a different but equally valid procedure. Future versions could decouple the goal predicate from the reference trajectory by specifying end-state conditions in a formal goal language, allowing any achieving sequence to score equally. 

Metric sensitivity. The supplementary LLM-only experiments show that WSR can be overly for-giving: no-memory baselines can achieve high final-state overlap while still failing on TSR and TCR. We therefore view WSR as a useful but incomplete metric. In the current release, completion-sensitive measures such as TSR and TCR are more reliable indicators of task success. 

Transition-rule coverage. The transition rule base has bounded coverage. Novel compositions outside the curated schema fail at the precondition check even if they are physically plausible. This limitation is shared by many executable symbolic benchmarks, but it is especially important here because the rules are compiled from video annotations. We therefore view rule coverage as both a limitation and a measurable property of the dataset. 

Upper-bound interpretation. The hidden-world reference used in the supplementary diagnostics is a conservative executable upper bound, not a separately optimized symbolic planner. It should therefore be interpreted as a stronger reference condition, not as a claim that the benchmark already contains a complete oracle solver. 

Dependence on HD-EPIC. Ego2World uses HD-EPIC as its source video substrate and inherits its kitchen scene distribution, annotation ontology, and activity coverage. This provides realistic and densely annotated source evidence, but the current release should be viewed as an executable evaluation layer over HD-EPIC rather than a general-purpose household data collection effort. 

LLM-generated scenario alternative. One could ask whether the HD-EPIC annotation substrate is necessary, or whether an LLM could directly generate kitchen scenarios from recipe corpora without real video grounding. We argue this conflates two separate desiderata: executability and 

ecological validity . An LLM can generate plausible recipe steps, but the resulting object layouts, action orderings, and failure modes would reflect the LLM’s prior over cooking rather than the dis-tribution of real human kitchen activity—including its long-tail interactions, improvised recoveries, and environment-specific constraints. Section 5.3 already shows that LLM-generated symbolic con-tent has a 48% hallucination rate even when given real narration evidence as input; without that grounding, the gap would be larger. 

Domain scope. The current benchmark focuses on kitchen environments. The design principles— video-compiled transition rules, strict world/belief separation, local delta observations, diagnostic replanning metrics, and executable replay evaluation—are not kitchen-specific and can be extended to other domestic domains in future work. 

H Artifact Release, Licensing, Compute, and Responsible Use 

Code and data availability. We provide an anonymized artifact through the Code URL. The ar-tifact includes simulator code, compiler utilities, schemas, transition-rule metadata, derived exe-cutable annotations, cached metric files, evaluation scripts, baseline runners, and table-reproduction scripts. API keys are not included. Raw HD-EPIC videos are not redistributed; users must obtain them from the official HD-EPIC release under its original access terms. Cached-mode reproduction does not require raw videos or external API keys. 

Benchmark card. EGO 2W ORLD is intended for evaluating executable belief-state planning under partial observation in egocentric kitchen environments. It is not a photorealistic simulator, a low-level robot-control benchmark, or a safety-certification testbed. The benchmark inherits the kitchen domain, activity distribution, and annotation ontology of HD-EPIC, and uses symbolic graph transi-tions rather than continuous physics. 31 LLM usage. LLMs are used as core experimental and construction components: planner back-bones, direct world-graph generation baselines, and bounded semantic reviewers in the annotation-to-environment compilation pipeline. LLM outputs used during benchmark construction are sub-ject to schema checks, source-evidence constraints, deterministic validation, and executable replay checks. 

Broader impacts and safeguards. EGO 2W ORLD supports reproducible evaluation of embodied belief-state planning and helps separate action plausibility, final-state correctness, memory use, va-lidity, replanning, and visual-query cost. Potential risks include privacy and data-governance con-cerns inherited from egocentric household video data and overinterpreting symbolic benchmark per-formance as real-robot readiness. We mitigate these risks by not redistributing raw videos, not re-leasing API keys or deployed models, documenting intended and out-of-scope uses, and providing cached outputs for reproducible review. 32