Title: PriorZero: Bridging Language Priors and World Models for Decision Making

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.12289v1

Published Time: Wed, 13 May 2026 01:48:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 37

Markdown Content:
# PriorZero: Bridging Language Priors and World Models for Decision Making 

Junyu Xiong 1 Yuan Pu 2 Jia Tang 3 Yazhe Niu 4,†

> 1

University of Science and Technology of China 2Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 

> 3

Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 4The Chinese University of Hong Kong MMLab 

> †

Corresponding author. 

## Abstract 

Leveraging the rich world knowledge of Large Language Models (LLMs) to en-hance Reinforcement Learning (RL) agents offers a promising path toward general intelligence. However, a fundamental prior-dynamics mismatch hinders existing approaches: static LLM knowledge cannot directly adapt to the complex transi-tion dynamics of long-horizon tasks. Using LLM priors as fixed policies limits exploration diversity, as the prior is blind to environment-specific dynamics; while end-to-end fine-tuning suffers from optimization instability and credit assignment issues. To bridge this gap, we propose PriorZero , a unified framework that inte-grates LLM-derived conceptual priors into world-model-based planning through a decoupled rollout-training design. During rollout, a novel root-prior injection mechanism incorporates LLM priors exclusively at the root node of Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), focusing search on semantically promising actions while preserving the world model’s deep lookahead capability. During training, PriorZero decouples world-model learning from LLM adaptation: the world model is con-tinuously refined on interaction data to jointly improve its dynamics, policy, and value predictions, its value estimates are then leveraged to provide fine-grained credit assignment signals for stable LLM fine-tuning via alternating optimization. Experiments across diverse benchmarks, including text-based adventure games in Jericho and instruction-following gridworld tasks in BabyAI, demonstrate that PriorZero consistently improves both exploration efficiency and asymptotic perfor-mance, establishing a promising framework for LLM-empowered decision-making. Our code is available at https://github.com/opendilab/LightZero. 

## 1 Introduction 

Large Language Models (LLMs) encode broad semantic and commonsense knowledge that can significantly benefit reinforcement learning (RL) agents in language-conditioned, embodied, and interactive decision-making tasks [Huang et al., 2022, Ahn et al., 2022, Li et al., 2022, Carta et al., 2023]. Such knowledge is particularly valuable in long-horizon environments with sparse rewards, where purely trial-and-error exploration often entails prohibitive interaction costs. However, transferring the static, declarative knowledge of LLMs to dynamic RL tasks remains challenging. The core difficulty lies in a prior–dynamics mismatch: LLMs excel at semantic plausibility and high-level reasoning, whereas RL agents must model environment-specific transitions, assign long-term credit, and plan under feedback. Existing paradigms expose this mismatch in different ways. Directly using an LLM as a policy [Huang et al., 2022, Ahn et al., 2022, Huang et al., 2023] often leads to myopic decisions because linguistic likelihood is not equivalent to environment return. End-to-end RL fine-tuning of LLM policies [Carta et al., 2023] introduces environment feedback, but suffers from high-variance credit assignment and poor scalability in long-horizon sparse-reward tasks. Using language models as dynamics models [Lin et al., 2024] can leverage language-conditioned prediction, but accurate action-conditioned transition modeling 

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2605.12289v1 [cs.LG] 12 May 2026

remains difficult: LLMs are pretrained via token-level autoregressive objectives, whereas latent dynamics models must predict state transitions at the state-action level—this granularity gap prevents the pretrained knowledge from being directly reused for dynamics learning. Finally, treating LLMs as frozen representations [Li et al., 2022] improves sample efficiency but limits task-specific adaptation. To address these bottlenecks, we propose PriorZero, a unified framework that integrates LLM semantic priors into world-model-based latent planning. Building upon recent advancements in model-based RL and latent world models [Hansen et al., 2024, Wang et al., 2024b, Pu et al., Xuan et al., 2024, Niu et al., 2024, Pu et al., 2025], PriorZero places a learnable world model between the LLM and the environment. This design enables the LLM to provide valuable semantic guidance while delegating transition modeling, value estimation, and multi-step planning to the world model. PriorZero decouples the rollout and training processes through two complementary mechanisms. During rollout, we introduce Root-Prior Injection : LLM semantic priors are fused exclusively at the root node of latent-space Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS). This provides the search with an informative initial direction while preserving the world model’s capacity to conduct deeper latent exploration, effectively preventing MCTS from falling into meaningless trajectory exploration (e.g., reward loops or logically inconsistent paths). During training, we introduces Alternating Reinforcement Fine-Tuning , which decouples world-model learning from LLM adaptation. First, the interaction data collected under the guidance of LLM priors is used to update the world model, accelerating the convergence of its components. Then, the world model’s action-value estimates are utilized to construct fine-grained credit assignment signals for stable LLM fine-tuning. This alternating process aligns the LLM prior more closely with environment-specific decision outcomes while avoiding the instability of end-to-end optimization. Experiments on Jericho Hausknecht et al. [2020] and BabyAI Chevalier-Boisvert et al. [2019] demonstrate that PriorZero improves exploration efficiency and final performance across text-based adventure games and gridworld instruction-following tasks. Our main contributions are: • We analyze the major paradigms for transferring LLM knowledge to RL agents and identify the 

prior-dynamics mismatch as the central obstacle in long-horizon, sparse-reward decision-making. • We propose PriorZero, a framework that synergizes LLM priors with world-model planning through two core mechanisms: Root-Prior Injection , which injects semantic guidance at the MCTS root node to facilitate exploration; and Alternating Reinforcement Fine-Tuning , which leverages world-model value estimates as fine-grained credit assignment signals for stable LLM adaptation. • We demonstrate strong performance on the Jericho and BabyAI benchmarks, and validate the specific contributions of root-prior injection, LLM fine-tuning, CoT-based prior extraction, model scale, and MCTS through comprehensive ablations. 

## 2 Categorization of LLM Knowledge Transfer Paradigms 

Transferring the world knowledge of LLMs to RL agents is a compelling yet challenging research direction [Shi et al., 2025, Yu et al., 2026]. We categorize existing approaches [Huang et al., 2022, Ahn et al., 2022, Huang et al., 2023, Szot et al., 2024, Lin et al., 2024, Shi et al., 2025, Yu et al., 2026] along three dimensions—LLM plasticity, core mechanism, and primary bottleneck—and identify established paradigms (Table 1). Figure 1 compares their performance on a representative Jericho task (Detective). Detailed analysis of each paradigm are provided in Appendix A. 

P1 (Naive Policy) directly prompts the LLM to select actions [Huang et al., 2022, Ahn et al., 2022, Wang et al., 2023, Yao et al., 2022], but the absence of an environmental feedback loop yields myopic policies—the “knowing-doing gap”. P2 (Naive RLFT) fine-tunes the LLM end-to-end via RL [Schmied et al., 2023, Zhai et al., 2024, Carta et al., 2023], yet suffers from high-variance gradients under sparse rewards, poor exploration in large action spaces, and prohibitive computational cost. P3 (Dynamics Modeling) uses the LLM to predict state transitions [Hao et al., 2023, Xie et al., 2025], but a granularity mismatch between token-level text generation and state-action-level transition prediction prevents the LLM’s pretrained knowledge from being effectively reused for latent dynamics learning. P4 (Text Encoder) extracts static LLM features for downstream RL modules [Xu et al., 2025, Szot et al., 2024, Wang et al., 2024a, Yan et al., 2025], avoiding catastrophic forgetting but imposing a performance ceiling due to non-adaptive representations. These limitations motivate PriorZero’s design: rather than forcing the LLM into a role in decision-making tasks, which 2Table 1: Comparison of LLM knowledge transfer paradigms for RL, characterized in LLM plasticity, core mechanism, and primary bottleneck. Existing paradigms (P1–P4) each face a distinct structural bottleneck in long-horizon, sparse-reward tasks. PriorZero resolves these by decoupling the LLM prior from world-model dynamics, yielding a favorable balance between adaptability and stability.                

> Paradigm LLM Plasticity Core Mechanism Primary Bottleneck
> Naive Policy Frozen Prompts LLM to directly output actions in text format.
> Knowing-Doing Gap : no environment-specific adaptation. Naive RLFT Trained LLM as learnable policy, end-to-end RL Training. Credit assignment failure under sparse rewards and diverse feedbacks. Dynamics Model Trained LLM predicts state transitions. Granularity Mismatch : token-level ̸=
> state-action-level. Text Encoder Frozen LLM encodes texts and extracts static semantic features.
> Representation Bottleneck :non-adaptive.
> PriorZero Alternating Decouples LLM from world-model; closed-loop mutual improvement. Requires balancing LLM prior and world-model policy.

Figure 1: Training curves of five LLM knowledge transfer paradigms on the Detective 

environment.P1–P3 stagnate at low return due to their structural bottlenecks: myopic action se-lection (P1), high-variance end-to-end updates (P2), and granularity mismatch between token-level pretraining and state-action-level dynamics (P3). P4 improves steadily but saturates below PriorZero due to its non-adaptive text representation. PriorZero achieves both faster convergence and the highest asymptotic return through its decoupling design (Table 1). is often ill-suited (e.g., dynamics modeling or end-to-end policy), we let it provide what it does best—semantic priors—and delegate dynamics and planning to a world model. 

## 3 PriorZero 

PriorZero proposes a decoupled rollout-training architecture that integrates Large Language Model (LLM) semantic priors into a world-model-based planning framework (Figure 2). Two principles guide its design, each directly responding to a failure mode identified in Section 2: (i) the LLM prior must not interfere with the world model’s faithful dynamics modeling —preventing the granularity mismatch that disabled P3; and (ii) the world model’s planning knowledge must provide a low-variance, fine-grained supervision signal for LLM adaptation —resolving the credit-assignment failure that plagued P2. During rollout, LLM-derived action priors are injected exclusively at the MCTS root node (§3.2). During training, world-model learning and LLM adaptation are optimized under distinct objectives in an alternating schedule (§3.3). Full implementation details are in Appendix B. 

3.1 Planning with a Latent World Model 

PriorZero adopts the same world-model setup as UniZero [Pu et al.]: a unified Transformer that processes interleaved observation and action embeddings to produce context-conditioned latent representations. Let Ht = ( ot−H+1 , a t−H+1 , . . . , o t) denote the historical context of length H at 3<< Hallway >>You are at the end of the hallway. To the north is a room, while to the west is the 

rest of the hallway. 

Enc .

Backbone  

> Dyn. Head Deci. Head

LLM 

World Model 

> Training Rollout

!!!" !#" ̂          

> "!̂#!"#$!%!
> Reasoning: Currently, I am in the hallway of
> the mayor‘s house, which is the final location
> from which I can direct my next …
> Action: north
> Reasoning: Currently, I am in the hallway of
> the mayor‘s house, which is the final location
> from which I can direct my next …
> Action: west
> Adv : 1
> Adv: -0.5
> Policy optimization
> #!̂
> %!"#

MCTS        

> %!̂
> %!"$
> north west …go
> &'% =)!$ −%!
> or
> Root node

Replay Buffer 

Store Latent Dynamics Sample Batch 

> …

Figure 2: Overview of PriorZero. Bottom : during rollout, the LLM produces a semantic action prior 

πLLM via chain-of-thought reasoning, which is fused with the world-model policy πWM exclusively at the MCTS root node ; non-root nodes rely entirely on the world model. Top : during training, the world model is updated on interaction data to refine its dynamics, value, and policy predictions; the resulting value estimates construct low-variance advantage signals for alternating LLM fine-tuning via PPO, forming a closed-loop mutual-improvement cycle. step t (H=10 during training and H=4 at test time). The Transformer encodes this sequence into 

zt = hθ (Ht), from which prediction heads output the policy and value: 

πWM (· | zt) = f πθ (zt), vθ (zt) = f vθ (zt).

Unlike LLMs, which model long-range dependencies at the token level, the world model captures long-range dependencies at the state-action level , directly relevant for credit assignment and planning. During the MCTS procedure, the dynamics model recursively unrolls imagined trajectories in the latent space, starting from zt:

(ˆ zt+k+1 , ˆrt+k) = gθ (ˆ zt+k, a t+k), k = 0 , 1, . . . , 

where ˆzt ≡ zt. In parallel, the same history is serialized into a textualized prompt Ct (the language counterpart of Ht) together with the candidate action set At. The pretrained LLM then serves as an independent commonsense oracle, producing an action prior πLLM (· | C t) that encodes its plausibility judgment over At, obtained through chain-of-thought reasoning (detailed below). 

3.2 Root-Prior Injection Why MCTS? A pretrained LLM offers strong priors but no environment-specific lookahead; pure model-free RL lacks sample-efficient credit assignment under sparse rewards. MCTS provides a step-wise policy-improvement operator over a learned latent dynamics model, turning πWM at each step into a stronger search-improved distribution. The remaining question is how to inject the LLM prior into MCTS without contaminating downstream simulation .

Root-Only Injection. The core design of PriorZero is to fuse the LLM prior exclusively at the MCTS root node. The root corresponds to zt, which encodes the full historical context Ht and aligns with the LLM’s judgment based on Ct. Non-root nodes in the search tree are recursively generated 4by the latent dynamics model and have no direct textual counterpart; injecting the LLM prior at such nodes would force a textual interpretation onto a state that no longer admits one, introducing systematic bias. The fused prior at the root and the world-model-only prior at non-root nodes are: 

Proot (a | zt) = (1 − α) πWM (a | zt) + α π LLM (a | C t), Pnon -root (a | ˆz) = πWM (a | ˆz).

Node selection follows the standard pUCT criterion. The MCTS lookahead resolves the myopia of LLM-only policies (P1) by replacing single-step likelihood with multi-step value estimation. Upon completion of the search, the root visit counts are temperature-scaled into the execution policy 

πMCTS (a | zt) ∝ N (zt, a )1/τ .

Structured Prior Extraction. To obtain high-quality priors, we use a two-stage prompt template. The LLM first produces a situation analysis ct under a neutrality constraint —a system instruction that requires the analysis to describe the state objectively without committing to any action (see example in Appendix B). Conditioned on (Ct, c t), the LLM then outputs the action distribution: 

πLLM (a | C t) ≜ PLLM (a | C t, c t), ct ∼ LLM( · | C t, [neutrality_constraint] ).

This “analyze-before-decide” design avoids the rationalization bias where the LLM, having commit-ted to an action, retroactively constructs reasoning that justifies it. Root-prior injection thus achieves a clean division of labor: the LLM biases the search toward semantically promising actions, while the world model performs the multi-step lookahead that determines their actual long-term value. 

3.3 Decoupled Training Strategy Alternating Fine-Tuning. World-model learning and LLM policy fine-tuning use distinct opti-mization objectives over a shared interaction stream, forming a closed-loop training pipeline. The two modules follow an asymmetric alternating schedule: NWM world-model updates are followed by NLLM LLM updates, with NWM :NLLM =10:1 . The world-model objective follows UniZero [Pu et al.], including policy distillation, distributional value prediction (categorical head over a discretized support), reward prediction, and latent consistency losses. A world-model warm-up phase precedes the first LLM update to ensure that the value is sufficiently accurate to provide meaningful signal. The core innovation is to construct a low-variance policy-gradient signal for the LLM from the world model’s value estimates. We use the n-step bootstrapped TD advantage: 

A(zt, a t) = Qn(zt, a t) − vθ (zt), Qn(zt, a t) = 

> n−1

X

> i=0

γirt+i + γnvθ (zt+n),

where vθ is the history-conditioned world-model value head, trained against MCTS-improved targets. Combining n real rewards with a trained bootstrap keeps variance well below Monte-Carlo returns. Raw advantages are normalized to ˆA within each LLM phase, then softly fused with a binary structured-template reward rfmt to obtain ˆAfinal (blending coefficient in Appendix B); this enforces schema compliance without overwhelming the value signal. The LLM parameters ϕ are updated via the clipped PPO objective with a KL regularizer to a frozen reference πref , following the RLFT recipes in LightRFT [Niu et al., 2025] and OpenRLHF [Hu et al., 2024]: 

Ltotal (ϕ) = − Et

h

min  ρt ˆAfinal , clip( ρt, 1−ϵ, 1+ ϵ) ˆAfinal 

i| {z }

> LPPO

+ β D KL (πϕ ∥ πref ),

where ρt = πϕ(yt | · )/π ϕold (yt | · ) is the per-token importance ratio over the generated CoT-and-action sequence. To focus updates on the tokens that determine the executed action, we scale the per-token loss of the CoT prefix by wcot =0 .1 while action tokens carry full weight; the ratio ρt itself is unaffected. 

Why This Decoupling Works. The closed loop directly addresses each failure mode identified in Section 2: (P1) the knowing-doing gap is closed because the LLM’s prior is grounded by world-model lookahead at every step; (P2) the credit-assignment failure of end-to-end RLFT is avoided because gradients reach the LLM only through the world-model’s variance-reduced advantage, never through long on-policy returns; (P3) the granularity mismatch is sidestepped because the LLM is never asked 5Figure 3: Main performance comparison between PriorZero and UniZero on four Jericho environ-ments. Shaded regions indicate variation across three random seeds. to predict transitions—it provides priors only at the root, where textual and latent representations align; (P4) the representation bottleneck is broken because the LLM is trainable, allowing its priors to co-evolve with the world model. The overall effect is a progressive alignment between LLM-encoded world knowledge and the environment’s state-action-level dynamics. 

## 4 Experiments and Analysis 

4.1 Experimental Setup Environments. We evaluate PriorZero on two complementary benchmarks. The primary eval-uation uses Jericho Hausknecht et al. [2020], a suite of text-based adventure games that stress long-horizon planning under sparse rewards. All methods restrict their action selection to the 

valid_actions provided by Jericho. To test generalization beyond text games, we further evalu-ate on BabyAI Chevalier-Boisvert et al. [2019], a grid-world environment with natural-language commands (§4.5). For Jericho, we select four games spanning distinct capability dimensions: • Detective —a mystery-solving game with short optimal paths ( <100 steps) and compact action spaces ( <10 per step). It tests commonsense reasoning via logical inference from textual clues. • Acorncourt —a puzzle-driven adventure with moderate horizons. Evaluates combinatorial action-space handling , requiring objects to be discovered and combined in the correct sequence. • Zork1 —a dungeon-exploration game with extended trajectories ( >300 steps) and over 50 actions per step. Evaluates long-horizon planning under sparse rewards across a vast, interconnected map. • Omniquest —a fantasy adventure with limited environmental feedback. Evaluates sparse-reward exploration , as meaningful rewards are separated by long sequences of unrewarded actions. 

Implementation Details. Our experiments build upon the unified MCTS framework established by LightZero [Niu et al., 2024]. We instantiate PriorZero on top of UniZero [Pu et al.] with 

Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct as the LLM. During inference, the LLM scores candidate actions condi-tioned on a chain-of-thought prefix; log-probabilities are normalized via softmax with temperature 1 to produce a smooth policy prior. During training, the fusion weight is α=0 .5, the CoT loss weight is wcot =0 .1, and the alternating schedule performs NWM =2000 world-model steps followed by NLLM =200 LLM PPO steps (AdamW, lr 1×10 −6, KL weight 0.01 ). Full hyperparameters are provided in Appendix B, and a per-paradigm compute breakdown is reported in Appendix B. 

Evaluation Metrics. We compare PriorZero with baselines in terms of convergence behavior across different environments, assessing overall decision-making capability and learning efficiency. In addition, we analyze the entropy of the MCTS root-node visit distributions, which reflects policy uncertainty and provides insight into how semantic priors influence exploration. 1

4.2 Main Results on Jericho 

Figure 3 compares PriorZero with UniZero on Jericho. In acorncourt and omniquest , PriorZero reaches high-return regions substantially earlier than UniZero, indicating that semantic priors are useful when sparse rewards make classical RL exploration inefficient. In detective , UniZero obtains strong early gains, but PriorZero continues improving and eventually surpasses it, suggesting that language priors become more valuable as they are adapted to task-specific dynamics. In the 

> 1The main comparison runs use three random seeds. Failed-variant ablation curves are reported from a single seed: preliminary runs already established their non-viability, and additional seeds would not have changed the qualitative conclusion.

6Figure 4: Return and MCTS root-node visit count entropy on zork1 environment. Solid curves denote evaluation returns, and dashed curves denote MCTS root-node visit count entropy. long-horizon zork1 , PriorZero achieves a higher asymptotic return, showing that root-prior guidance can still benefit planning even when success depends on extended multi-step trajectories. Figure 8 further examines the LLM component during alternating training. We refer to the standalone LLM policy as PriorZero’s LLM component evaluated in isolation: actions are sampled directly from 

πLLM without any world-model rollout or MCTS, so the curve measures the LLM’s own policy quality 

as it is fine-tuned by the world-model advantage. Across the four games, the standalone LLM policy improves steadily rather than collapsing under sparse rewards, confirming that the world-model-based advantage provides a stable, low-variance policy-gradient signal for LLM adaptation. This trend explains why PriorZero’s gains are not limited to the initial use of a frozen prior: as training proceeds, the LLM prior becomes increasingly aligned with environment dynamics, which improves root-node search guidance and in turn exposes the world model to higher-quality trajectories. 

4.3 Analysis of Root-Prior Injection 

Figure 4 tracks both return and MCTS root-node visit count entropy on zork1 . Two phases emerge. Early in training, PriorZero improves faster than UniZero while its root-node entropy is lower —the LLM prior concentrates search on semantically meaningful actions, avoiding cyclic exploration in 

zork1 ’s large admissible-action space. Later, as the world model matures, PriorZero’s root entropy rises above UniZero’s while its return remains higher, showing that the prior does not collapse search onto a single action but instead prevents the visit distribution from being dominated by brittle world-model preferences. A representative case study and further breakdown are in Appendix B.1. Fig. 9 illustrates this effect at the action level. In the game history, the agent repeatedly enters a closet to the north and returns south, forming an unproductive loop, while the current observation indicates that moving west leads back to the hallway. The LLM assigns most probability mass to west , whereas the world model still favors north . Root-prior fusion redirects MCTS toward the appropriate action and helps break the dead-loop exploration pattern. More generally, these examples show that LLM priors can provide useful initial directions for MCTS, especially when the learned world model has not yet distinguished productive actions from locally repetitive but low-value behavior. 

4.4 Ablation Studies 

We conduct ablation studies on Jericho to validate the four key design choices of PriorZero: (a) the alternating fine-tuning schedule (§3.3), (b) the chain-of-thought prior extraction with weighted token loss (§3.2), (c) the capacity of the underlying LLM, and (d) the necessity of MCTS lookahead. 

Effect of LLM Fine-Tuning. Fig. 5a compares PriorZero against two variants: a frozen-LLM variant and a non-alternating variant. While the frozen-LLM variant provides useful early-stage guidance—demonstrating the inherent strength of LLM priors, particularly in the challenging zork1 

environment—its performance eventually plateaus at a suboptimal level. In later training stages, the static LLM priors become increasingly misaligned with the agent’s needs; because the LLM cannot be fine-tuned to adapt, these priors act as a bottleneck, leading to poor results even in the simpler 

detective game. Conversely, the non-alternating variant attempts to update the LLM from the very beginning. This approach, however, forces the LLM to learn from the purely noisy value signals of an 7Figure 5: Ablation studies of the PriorZero on the detective and zork1 . (a) Impact of the training strategy, comparing full PriorZero against a frozen-prior baseline and a non-alternating optimization variant. (b) Effect of Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning and the corresponding CoT loss weight (wcot ). Note that removing CoT entirely leads to numerical instability (NaN). (c) Scaling the LLM prior from a 3B to a 7B parameter. (d) Contribution of MCTS planning to performance and stability. 0k 20k 40k 60k 80k 100k 

> Env Steps
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Return
> BabyAI-18 (aggregated)
> PriorZero
> UniZero

Figure 6: Aggregated return of PriorZero vs. UniZero on BabyAI-18, averaged over the 18 levels. Shaded regions indicate vari-ation across three random seeds. PriorZero reaches high-return regions earlier and con-verges to a higher plateau, confirming that root-prior injection and alternating fine-tuning are also effective on the grid-world BabyAI benchmark. uninitialized world model, leading to detrimental updates (or "knowledge corruption"). Consequently, this variant achieves only mediocre performance in detective and suffers a complete performance collapse in the difficult zork1 . These findings underscore that PriorZero’s efficacy stems not just from injecting LLM priors, but crucially from the asymmetric alternating schedule, which ensures the world model establishes reliable value estimates before they are used to guide the LLM’s training. 

CoT Loss Weight Analysis. Figure 5b investigates the role of CoT reasoning and the loss weight 

wcot applied to the reasoning-prefix tokens during LLM fine-tuning. Completely omitting CoT reasoning induces severe training instability, resulting in numerical failures (NaN): without an intermediate reasoning prefix, the policy-gradient variance on raw action tokens becomes effectively unbounded under sparse rewards, producing NaN within a few iterations. Conversely, applying a full CoT loss weight ( wcot =1 .0) prevents numerical collapse but leads to volatile learning dynamics and inferior final performance. The likely cause is that strong supervision on the long reasoning prefix diffuses optimization capacity onto fine-grained reasoning-text tokens, while credit assignment within a long reasoning sequence is itself noisy—so heavy gradients on these tokens hurt rather than help. Our default configuration ( wcot =0 .1) strikes a better balance: the action-token loss remains the dominant learning signal, while the reasoning prefix is preserved as a contextual scaffold. 

Scaling with LLM Size. Figure 5c assesses the scalability of LLM priors by upgrading the base model to Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct . In the long-horizon zork1 , the 7B model exhibits faster conver-gence and achieves superior performance, confirming that more potent semantic priors significantly enhance exploration in expansive action spaces. Conversely, in the simpler detective task, while the 7B variant remains competitive, it suffers from higher variance compared to the 3B model, which converges more smoothly. This suggests that while scaling up the LLM bolsters semantic guidance—especially for complex tasks—it also introduces increased sensitivity to training dynamics, indicating that model scaling must be paired with robust optimization strategies to maintain stability. 

Effect of MCTS. Figure 5d isolates the impact of MCTS by disabling it, thereby forcing the agent to rely solely on the world model without lookahead planning. This variant collapses across both 8detective and zork1 , and exhibits severe numerical instability in the former. This demonstrates that MCTS is an indispensable component of the PriorZero architecture: by fusing LLM semantic priors with world-model predictions, MCTS produces planning-improved policy targets that stabilize learning under sparse rewards—a stabilization role that no single component can play alone. 

4.5 Extension to the Grid-World BabyAI Benchmark 

To test whether PriorZero benefits beyond textgames, we evaluate on the BabyAI [Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2019]—a grid-world environment [Xi et al., 2025b]. Agents navigate procedurally generated rooms, move objects, unlock doors, and interact with the environment in response to language commands. Unlike Jericho’s free-form text, BabyAI provides structured states (object descriptions with relative positions), high-level semantic actions (e.g., “go to red ball 1”), and a continuous reward .Following Xi et al. [2025b], we train an agent across 18 levels spanning four categories. For BabyAI we use a larger backbone, Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct , with an alternating schedule of NWM =500 

world-model steps and NLLM =100 LLM steps ( 5:1 ratio); the increased LLM capacity matches the multi-task nature of BabyAI’s 18 levels, while the smaller step counts reflect the shorter episodes. Figure 6 reports aggregated return on the 18 BabyAI levels. PriorZero and UniZero learn at similar rates in the early phase, but in the later phase the LLM prior helps the world model escape local optima, lifting PriorZero to a higher asymptotic plateau ( 0.82 vs. 0.79 ). The gap is most pronounced on compositional levels such as SynthLoc , where UniZero fails to learn any positive behavior while PriorZero attains 0.96 , indicating that semantic priors remain useful when agents must decompose goals into sub-tasks. Per-level curves, the standalone LLM ablation, and detailed setup are in Appendix B. 

## 5 Related Work 

Pre-Training for RL. Recent work integrates pre-training into RL to improve sample efficiency and generalization. World Models [Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018] learn generative dynamics in latent space; CURL [Laskin et al., 2020] applies contrastive learning in pixel space; PIE-G [Yuan et al., 2022] transfers pre-trained encoders for zero-shot learning; VIP [Ma et al., 2022] extracts implicit value from videos; and Dynalang [Lin et al., 2024] trains world models on text corpora for planning without environments. PriorZero does not require pre-training: the world model is trained online from scratch, while the LLM prior is adapted in-the-loop without relying on offline text datasets. 

LLM Priors for RL. LLMs have been leveraged to assist RL agents in multiple ways, which largely correspond to the paradigms categorized in §2: as zero-shot planners [Huang et al., 2022] (P1), as end-to-end fine-tuned policies [Carta et al., 2023] (P2), as dynamics models [Lin et al., 2024] (P3), as frozen text encoders [Paischer et al., 2022] (P4), and as MCTS action proposers [Shi et al., 2025]. The first four exhibit bottlenecks analyzed in §2; the last keeps the LLM frozen and therefore cannot close the prior-dynamics mismatch through adaptation. PriorZero is the first to integrate LLM priors with a learnable world model through root-prior injection and alternating fine-tuning, enabling continuous policy refinement while keeping dynamics learning uncontaminated by token-level bias. 

RL Fine-Tuning of LLMs. RLHF [Christiano et al., 2017, Ouyang et al., 2022, Xiong et al., 2026] has become the dominant paradigm for LLM alignment, with extensions to AI feedback [Bai et al., 2022, Lee et al., 2023] and search-augmented training [Guan et al., 2025]. For decision-making, Schmied et al. [2025] study RLFT effects on LLM decision behaviors but are limited to short-horizon tasks. PriorZero constructs advantage signals from world-model value estimates via value bootstrapping, providing low-variance feedback that resolves the credit-assignment failure limiting end-to-end RLFT (P2 in §2) and enables stable fine-tuning in long-horizon, sparse-reward environments. For a more comprehensive discussion of each line of work, please refer to Appendix C. 

## 6 Conclusion 

We introduced PriorZero, a unified framework that addresses the prior-dynamics mismatch between pretrained LLM and long-horizon RL optimization through a decoupled rollout-training design. During rollout, root-only injection fuses LLM priors exclusively at the MCTS root node, guiding search toward semantically plausible actions while preserving the world model’s multi-step lookahead capacity. During training, alternating fine-tuning uses world-model value estimates to construct better advantage signals, providing stable policy-gradient for LLM adaptation. Together, these components form a closed loop in which the world model and LLM mutually reinforce each other: the LLM’s priors focus the search, and the world model’s planning refines the LLM’s priors. Experiments on 9Jericho and BabyAI validate that PriorZero consistently improves exploration and return; ablations confirm that each component is necessary, and that the framework scales with LLM capacity. 

## Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding 

We extend our gratitude to several team-members of the Shanghai AI Laboratory for their invaluable assistance, support, and feedback on this paper and the associated codebase. 

## References 

Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691 , 2022. Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073 , 2022. Shreyas Basavatia, Keerthiram Murugesan, and Shivam Ratnakar. Starling: Self-supervised training of text-based reinforcement learning agent with large language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024 , pages 15804–15819, 2024. Meng Cao, Lei Shu, Lei Yu, Yun Zhu, Nevan Wichers, Yinxiao Liu, and Lei Meng. Beyond sparse rewards: Enhancing reinforcement learning with language model critique in text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.07382 , 2024. Thomas Carta, Clément Romac, Thomas Wolf, Sylvain Lamprier, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Grounding large language models in interactive environments with online reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 3676–3713. PMLR, 2023. Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Salem Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan Saharia, Thien Huu Nguyen, and Yoshua Bengio. Babyai: A platform to study the sample efficiency of grounded language learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Xinyu Guan, Li Lyna Zhang, Yifei Liu, Ning Shang, Youran Sun, Yi Zhu, Fan Yang, and Mao Yang. Rstar-math: Small llms can master math reasoning with self-evolved deep thinking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.04519 , 2025. David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122 , 2(3):440, 2018. Nick Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. TD-MPC2: Scalable, robust world models for continuous control. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Wang, and Zhiting Hu. Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 8154–8173, 2023. Matthew Hausknecht, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Xingdi Yuan. Interac-tive fiction games: A colossal adventure. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2020. Jian Hu, Xibin Wu, Zilin Zhu, Xianyu, Weixun Wang, Dehao Zhang, and Yu Cao. Openrlhf: An easy-to-use, scalable and high-performance rlhf framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11143 ,2024. 10 Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 9118–9147. PMLR, 2022. Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Tomas Jackson, Noah Brown, Linda Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through planning with language models. In Proceedings of The 6th Conference on Robot Learning ,volume 205 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1769–1782. PMLR, 2023. Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , pages 611–626, 2023. Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. Curl: Contrastive unsupervised representations for reinforcement learning. In International conference on machine learning , pages 5639–5650. PMLR, 2020. Harrison Lee, Samrat Phatale, Hassan Mansoor, Kellie Ren Lu, Thomas Mesnard, Johan Ferret, Colton Bishop, Ethan Hall, Victor Carbune, and Abhinav Rastogi. Rlaif: Scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback with ai feedback. 2023. Shuang Li, Xavier Puig, Chris Paxton, Yilun Du, Clinton Wang, Linxi Fan, Tao Chen, De-An Huang, Ekin Akyürek, Anima Anandkumar, et al. Pre-trained language models for interactive decision-making. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:31199–31212, 2022. Jessy Lin, Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Danijar Hafner, Pieter Abbeel, Dan Klein, and Anca Dragan. Learning to model the world with language. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 29992– 30017. PMLR, 2024. Ollie Liu, Deqing Fu, Dani Yogatama, and Willie Neiswanger. Dellma: Decision making under uncertainty with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02392 , 2024. Yecheng Jason Ma, Shagun Sodhani, Dinesh Jayaraman, Osbert Bastani, Vikash Kumar, and Amy Zhang. Vip: Towards universal visual reward and representation via value-implicit pre-training. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.00030 , 2022. Yazhe Niu, Yuan Pu, Zhenjie Yang, Xueyan Li, Tong Zhou, Jiyuan Ren, Shuai Hu, Hongsheng Li, and Yu Liu. Lightzero: A unified benchmark for monte carlo tree search in general sequential decision scenarios. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024. Yazhe Niu, Yuan Pu, Dongxing Shi, Yudong Lu, Yingtong Xiong, Ruijun Ge, Jiaxuan Sun, Zu-nian Wan, and Shaoang Zhang. Lightrft: Light, efficient, omni-modal & reward-model driven reinforcement fine-tuning framework. https://github.com/opendilab/LightRFT , 2025. Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback, 2022. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155 .Fabian Paischer, Thomas Adler, Vihang Patil, Angela Bitto-Nemling, Markus Holzleitner, Sebastian Lehner, Hamid Eghbal-Zadeh, and Sepp Hochreiter. History compression via language models in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning ,volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 17156–17185. PMLR, 2022. Yuan Pu, Yazhe Niu, Zhenjie Yang, Jiyuan Ren, Hongsheng Li, and Yu Liu. Unizero: Generalized and efficient planning with scalable latent world models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research .11 Yuan Pu, Yazhe Niu, Jia Tang, Junyu Xiong, Shuai Hu, and Hongsheng Li. One model for all tasks: Leveraging efficient world models in multi-task planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07945 , 2025. Thomas Schmied, Markus Hofmarcher, Fabian Paischer, Razvan Pascanu, and Sepp Hochreiter. Learning to modulate pre-trained models in rl. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. Thomas Schmied, Jörg Bornschein, Jordi Grau-Moya, Markus Wulfmeier, and Razvan Pascanu. Llms are greedy agents: Effects of rl fine-tuning on decision-making abilities, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.16078 .Younggyo Seo, Kimin Lee, Stephen L James, and Pieter Abbeel. Reinforcement learning with action-free pre-training from videos. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 19561–19579. PMLR, 2022. Zijing Shi, Meng Fang, and Ling Chen. Monte carlo planning with large language model for text-based game agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16855 , 2025. Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:3008–3021, 2020. Andrew Szot, Max Schwarzer, Harsh Agrawal, Bogdan Mazoure, Walter Talbott, Katherine Metcalf, Natalie Mackraz, Devon Hjelm, and Alexander Toshev. Large language models as generalizable policies for embodied tasks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Boyuan Wang, Yun Qu, Yuhang Jiang, Jianzhun Shao, Chang Liu, Wenming Yang, and Xiangyang Ji. Llm-empowered state representation for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.13237 ,2024a. Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 , 2023. Shengjie Wang, Shaohuai Liu, Weirui Ye, Jiacheng You, and Yang Gao. Efficientzero v2: Mastering discrete and continuous control with limited data. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024b. Jialong Wu, Haoyu Ma, Chaoyi Deng, and Mingsheng Long. Pre-training contextualized world models with in-the-wild videos for reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:39719–39743, 2023. Zhiheng Xi, Yiwen Ding, Wenxiang Chen, Boyang Hong, Honglin Guo, Junzhe Wang, Xin Guo, Dingwen Yang, Chenyang Liao, Wei He, Songyang Gao, Lu Chen, Rui Zheng, Yicheng Zou, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Xipeng Qiu, Xuanjing Huang, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Agentgym: Evolving large language model-based agents across diverse environments. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2025a. Zhiheng Xi, Jixuan Huang, Chenyang Liao, Baodai Huang, Honglin Guo, Jiaqi Liu, Rui Zheng, Junjie Ye, Jiazheng Zhang, Wenxiang Chen, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Guanyu Li, Zehui Chen, Zhengyin Du, Xuesong Yao, Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang. Agentgym-rl: Training llm agents for long-horizon decision making through multi-turn reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.08755 , 2025b. Kaige Xie, Ian Yang, John Gunerli, and Mark Riedl. Making large language models into world models with precondition and effect knowledge. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 7532–7545, 2025. Junyu Xiong, Yonghui Wang, Weichao Zhao, Chenyu Liu, Bing Yin, Wengang Zhou, and Houqiang Li. Docr1: Evidence page-guided grpo for multi-page document understanding. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 40, pages 11178–11186, 2026. 12 Haoran Xu, Peixi Peng, Guang Tan, Yiqian Chang, Luntong Li, and Yonghong Tian. Vlms-guided representation distillation for efficient vision-based reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pages 29534–29544, 2025. Chunyu Xuan, Yazhe Niu, Yuan Pu, Shuai Hu, Yu Liu, and Jing Yang. Rezero: Boosting mcts-based algorithms by backward-view and entire-buffer reanalyze. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16364 , 2024. Xue Yan, Yan Song, Xidong Feng, Mengyue Yang, Haifeng Zhang, Haitham Bou Ammar, and Jun Wang. Efficient reinforcement learning with large language model priors. In 13th International Conference on Learning Representations Iclr 2025 , pages 30818–30842. ICLR, 2025. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 ,2022. Xiao Yu, Baolin Peng, Ruize Xu, Yelong Shen, Pengcheng He, Suman Nath, Nikhil Singh, Jiangfeng Gao, and Zhou Yu. Reinforcement world model learning for llm-based agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05842 , 2026. Zhecheng Yuan, Zhengrong Xue, Bo Yuan, Xueqian Wang, Yi Wu, Yang Gao, and Huazhe Xu. Pre-trained image encoder for generalizable visual reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:13022–13037, 2022. Yuexiang Zhai, Hao Bai, Zipeng Lin, Jiayi Pan, Shengbang Tong, Yifei Zhou, Alane Suhr, Saining Xie, Yann LeCun, Yi Ma, et al. Fine-tuning large vision-language models as decision-making agents via reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 37:110935–110971, 2024. Yichi Zhang, Siyuan Zhang, Yao Huang, Zeyu Xia, Zhengwei Fang, Xiao Yang, Ranjie Duan, Dong Yan, Yinpeng Dong, and Jun Zhu. Stair: Improving safety alignment with introspective reasoning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02384 , 2025. Daniel M Ziegler, Nisan Stiennon, Jeffrey Wu, Tom B Brown, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, Paul Christiano, and Geoffrey Irving. Fine-tuning language models from human preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08593 , 2019. 13 Appendix Contents 

A. Detailed Analysis of LLM Knowledge Transfer Paradigms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 B. Implementation and Experiment Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17 C. Detailed Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 D. Prompt Template . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 14 A Detailed Analysis of LLM Knowledge Transfer Paradigms 

We provide detailed formulations and analysis of the four existing paradigms for transferring LLM knowledge to RL agents, summarized in Table 1 and illustrated in Figure 7. These paradigms correspond to four natural roles an LLM may assume in a text-based RL pipeline: as the policy, as a trainable policy, as the dynamics model backbone, or as the text encoder, as visualized in the four panels of Figure 7. Unless otherwise stated, all ablations use the same Jericho task setup and admissible action interface as the main PriorZero experiments. 

Figure 7: Comparison of the four LLM-knowledge-transfer paradigms studied in our ablations. Each panel shows where the LLM is inserted into the RL pipeline (as the policy, as a trainable policy, as the dynamics model backbone, or as the text encoder), with an icon in the top-right corner of each module indicating its training status: a fire icon denotes trainable components, while a ice icon denotes fixed (frozen) components. 

Paradigm 1: LLM Directly as Policy (Naive Policy). The most intuitive approach is to use the LLM itself as a zero-shot or few-shot policy [Huang et al., 2022, Ahn et al., 2022, Wang et al., 2023]. At each environment step, the current textual observation, a bounded interaction history, and the valid action set returned by Jericho are converted into a natural-language prompt. In our implementation, the history length is fixed to 25 previous transitions, and the prompt explicitly lists the current valid actions. A frozen Qwen2.5-3B-Insrtuct model then scores each admissible action string. Formally, for an action a ∈ A t with tokenization y(a), we compute 

sθ (a | ot, h t, At) = 1

|y(a)|

> |y(a)|

X

> i=1

log pθ (yi(a) | Prompt( ot, h t, At), y <i (a)) , (1) where ot is the current observation, ht is the truncated history, and At is the valid action set. The induced policy is obtained by temperature-normalizing the action scores, 

πLLM (a | ot, h t) = exp( sθ (a | ot, h t, At)/τ )

P 

> a′∈A t

exp( sθ (a′ | ot, h t, At)/τ ) . (2) 15 The greedy variant (used in this paper) executes arg max a∈A t πLLM (a | ot, h t), while the stochastic variant samples from this distribution. This baseline deliberately removes the world model, MCTS, replay buffer, value learning, and all forms of training. It therefore isolates the effect of the pretrained LLM prior when used as a complete decision rule. Although this paradigm is simple and can exploit commonsense affordances encoded in the LLM, it is fundamentally limited by the knowing-doing gap : high language-model likelihood does not imply high environment return. The model may prefer actions that are linguistically plausible or locally sensible, but it has no mechanism for environment-specific adaptation—no temporal credit assignment, no belief-state maintenance, no systematic exploration, and no multi-step lookahead. Consequently, errors made early in an episode cannot be corrected through policy improvement, and the agent stagnates in long-horizon settings. 

Paradigm 2: End-to-End RL Fine-Tuning (Naive RLFT). The second paradigm closes the environment-feedback loop by treating the LLM as a parameterized policy and fine-tuning it with reinforcement learning. We instantiate this baseline as a standard actor-critic RLFT procedure. The actor is initialized from the LLM policy, and a scalar value head is attached to the same backbone. A frozen reference model is retained to regularize updates through a KL penalty. At iteration k, the current policy collects N complete Jericho episodes, all step-level samples are merged into a rollout buffer, and the value head is used to compute generalized advantage estimates. Specifically, 

δt = rt + γV ϕ(st+1 ) − Vϕ(st), ˆAt = 

> T−t

X

> ℓ=0

(γλ )ℓδt+ℓ, (3) with return target ˆRt = ˆAt + Vϕ(st). The implementation uses the value predicted at the prompt boundary, i.e., the state representation immediately before the action tokens, so that the value corresponds to the current game state rather than to the generated action text. Policy optimization then follows the clipped PPO objective: 

LPPO = −Et

h

min 



ρt ˆAt, clip( ρt, 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAt

i 

+ cv LV + β KL( πθ ∥ πref ) , (4) where ρt = πθ (at | st)/π θold (at | st), LV is a clipped value regression loss, and πref is the frozen reference policy. In our ablation, one training iteration collects a fixed number of full episodes (default 50 ), normalizes advantages across all the workers, and performs multiple PPO epochs over minibatches sampled from the merged rollout data. The full experiment is budgeted by total environment steps rather than by gradient steps, matching the reporting convention used by PriorZero. This paradigm is appealing because it directly optimizes the LLM for task reward and allows the policy to adapt beyond static prompting. However, in Jericho-style environments it faces a difficult combination of sparse rewards, long horizons, and large language-action spaces. The LLM must simultaneously learn action grounding, exploration, value estimation, and long-horizon credit assign-ment from expensive on-policy rollouts. Even with PPO clipping and reference KL regularization, useful gradients are delayed and high variance, while each update requires forward/backward passes through a large language model. Thus RLFT can improve local action preferences but remains computationally expensive and statistically inefficient as a standalone solution. 

Paradigm 3: LLM as Dynamics Model (Latent World-Model Backbone). A third paradigm retains the model-based RL structure but replaces the latent dynamics backbone with an LLM. In this ablation, we keep the UniZero-style interaction loop, replay buffer, MCTS, reward/value/policy heads, and the lightweight BGE observation encoder. The only architectural substitution is inside the latent world model: the transformer that processes interleaved latent observation tokens and action tokens is replaced by Qwen2.5-0.5B. Thus the LLM is not used to read raw observations or directly generate actions; it serves as the sequence backbone for latent transition modeling. Let zt = fBGE (ot) denote the observation embedding and e(at) denote the learned action embedding. The world model receives sequences of the form 

x1:2 K = ( zt−K+1 , e (at−K+1 ), . . . , z t, e (at)) , (5) and predicts next-latent observations, rewards, values, and policies from the Qwen hidden states. Because Qwen2.5 uses grouped-query attention, the implementation adapts the UniZero KV cache so that the number of key/value heads and the per-head hidden dimension match the pretrained Qwen 16 configuration. The downstream UniZero heads are trained with the same world-model losses as the standard backbone, including latent reconstruction, reward, policy and value prediction. This ablation tests whether next-token pretraining provides a useful inductive bias for latent dynamics. The limitation is a granularity mismatch : a causal LLM is pretrained at the token level to model natural-language continuations, while a latent world model must operate at the state-action level to represent action-conditioned, controllable state transitions. These two structures are related but not equivalent—linguistically similar states may have different transition consequences, and dynamically equivalent states may be described with different text. As a result, the world knowledge encoded in token-level pretraining cannot be effectively reused for latent dynamics learning: replacing the dynamics backbone with a pretrained LLM imports semantic structure but also imposes a representation geometry poorly aligned with one-step transition accuracy and multi-step MCTS rollout consistency. This paradigm therefore probes whether LLM capacity can substitute for a task-trained dynamics model; our results indicate that it cannot. 

Paradigm 4: LLM as Text Encoder. The fourth paradigm places the LLM at the perception layer. Instead of using a lightweight BGE encoder to convert observations into latent vectors, this ablation uses Qwen3-4B as the text encoder. Given an observation token sequence x1: L, the causal LLM produces final-layer hidden states h1: L. Since the hidden state at the last non-padding token is the representation used to predict the next token, we use that vector as the sentence-level embedding and project it into the UniZero latent dimension: 

zt = Norm( W h L) , (6) where W is a learnable projection head and Norm is the same encoder normalization used by the world model. The pretrained Qwen encoder is frozen, while the projection and downstream RL/world-model modules are optimized by the usual training objective. This paradigm avoids catastrophic forgetting and provides a stronger semantic encoder than a lightweight sentence model. Nevertheless, it introduces a representation bottleneck : the frozen next-token representation is optimized to support language continuation, not to preserve the controllable variables required by planning. Textual observations that are close under semantic similarity can require different actions, whereas observations with different surface forms can correspond to the same underlying game state. Because the LLM encoder is frozen, the RL agent can only adapt the projection and downstream dynamics model, limiting its ability to reshape the representation around task-specific invariances and action-conditioned distinctions. The resulting non-adaptive representation imposes a performance ceiling—the agent benefits from richer language features but cannot surpass the expressiveness boundary set by the frozen encoder. 

## B Implementation and Experiment Details 

B.1 PriorZero Implementation Details 

Our code is available at https://github.com/opendilab/LightZero .This subsection gives the complete implementation-level view of PriorZero. The actual system contains three coupled but gradient-decoupled components: (i) a UniZero-style world model with latent MCTS, (ii) an LLM prior module that scores admissible action strings through prompt log-probabilities, and (iii) an alternating trainer that uses world-model value estimates to fine-tune the LLM, with the LLM rollout-and-update infrastructure (vLLM-based generation, PPO token loss, KL regularization, and reference-model bookkeeping) adapted from LightRFT [Niu et al., 2025] and OpenRLHF [Hu et al., 2024]. The two trainable modules communicate only through rollout data and scalar training targets: LLM priors affect the MCTS root distribution and thereby the collected trajectories, while world-model values produce the advantage signal used to update the LLM. Table 2 summarizes the overall PriorZero training procedure in pseudocode form. 

Planning advantage and comparison with GRPO. For LLM fine-tuning, PriorZero does not use a group-relative reward baseline. For each sampled transition, the replay buffer computes two world-model value quantities using the target model ¯θ: a bootstrapped TD target from the future state 17 Table 2: Pseudocode of PriorZero. The LLM prior is injected only at the MCTS root during rollout, while LLM fine-tuning is driven by value-based advantage computed from the target world model. 

Input: environment E, admissible actions A(s), MCTS budget K, TD horizon n, fusion weight α, schedules 

NWM , N LLM 

Initialize: world model θ, target world model ¯θ ← θ, LLM ϕ, reference LLM ϕref , replay buffer D, phase 

p ← WM 

1 while training budget is not exhausted do 

2 if p = WM or collection is enabled in the LLM phase then 

3 for each environment step t do 

4 Ct ← BuildPrompt( ot, Ht, A(st)) 

5 (πT

> LLM

, Bt) ← ScoreActionsWithLLM( ϕ, Ct, A(st)) 

6 (zt, π WM , v θ ) ← InitialInference θ (st)

7 Proot ← (1 − α)πWM + απ T 

> LLM

root only 

8 (πMCTS , V t) ← MCTS( zt, P root , K ; θ) internal nodes use πWM 

9 at ∼ πMCTS (· | st); (ot+1 , r t, done) ← E . Step( at)

10 D ← D ∪ (ot, Ht, a t, r t, π MCTS , V t, Bt)

11 end for 

12 end if 

13 if p = WM then 

14 for i = 1 , . . . , N WM do 

15 M ← SampleWindows( D); update θ with reward, value, policy, and dynamics losses 16 ¯θ ← UpdateTarget( ¯θ, θ )

17 end for ; p ← LLM 

18 else 

19 for i = 1 , . . . , N LLM do 

20 M ← FetchLLMSamples( D)

21 Q(n) 

> t

← Pn−1 

> j=0

γj rt+j + γnv¯θ (st+n)

22 At ← Q(n) 

> t

− v¯θ (st); ˆA ← Normalize( A, r fmt )

23 update ϕ with clipped PPO token loss and KL to ϕref 

24 synchronize ϕ to the vLLM rollout engine 25 end for ; p ← WM 

26 end if 

27 end while 

and a predicted value at the current state. The raw advantage is 

At = Q(n)¯θ (st, a t) − v¯θ (st), Q(n)¯θ (st, a t) = 

> n−1

X

> i=0

γirt+i + γnv¯θ (st+n).

In the default configuration, these raw advantages are accumulated within the current LLM phase and normalized by global phase statistics, 

ˆAt = At − μphase 

σphase + ϵ .

When CoT format supervision is enabled, the final scalar used by the policy loss is 

ˆAfinal  

> t

= (1 − λfmt ) ˆAt + λfmt rfmt ,

where rfmt ∈ { 0, 1} checks whether the LLM output follows the required Reasoning: ... Action: ... template. This differs from GRPO-style training in the source of the baseline and in the unit of comparison. GRPO samples multiple completions for the same prompt and constructs a relative advantage by subtracting the mean reward of that prompt’s completion group, often also dividing by the group standard deviation: 

AGRPO  

> i

≈ Ri − 1

> G

PGj=1 Rj

std( {Rj }Gj=1 ) + ϵ .

18 Such a baseline avoids learning an explicit value function, but it requires several rollouts per prompt and its signal is only relative within the sampled group. In sparse, long-horizon environments, most group rewards can be identical or delayed, making the normalized reward signal noisy or uninformative. PriorZero instead uses the world model as a state-dependent critic: it combines real short-horizon rewards with bootstrapped long-term value and compares the resulting target against the same state’s baseline. This gives lower-variance credit assignment without requiring multiple LLM completions for every prompt, while preserving an absolute notion of whether the executed action improved over the current value estimate. This estimator is approximately off-policy: actions at are drawn from the MCTS visit distribution 

πMCTS rather than from πϕ directly, so v¯θ acts as a proxy for V πϕ rather than an exact on-policy value. Two factors keep this approximation tight in our setting. First, the LLM prior is injected at the MCTS root (line 7 of Table 2), so πϕ and πMCTS are coupled by construction: the search distribution is a planning-improved version of the LLM prior on the same root state, not an independently sampled behaviour policy. Second, the clipped PPO ratio ρt,j ∈ [1 − ϵlow , 1 + ϵhigh ] together with the KL regularizer βD KL (πϕ∥πϕref ) bounds the per-update policy drift, which limits how far πϕ

can move away from the behaviour distribution that produced the stored advantages, making this a standard near-on-policy regime in PPO-style fine-tuning. Such crucial under Jericho-style sparse rewards, where any additional variance in the policy-gradient signal would be amplified by long credit-assignment chains. The trade-off is that PriorZero depends on the world model’s value quality, which is why the implementation uses a WM warm-up and asymmetric alternating updates with many more WM updates than LLM updates. 

PriorZero loss vs. AlphaZero-like SFT loss. An AlphaZero-like supervised objective for the LLM prior would train the LLM to imitate the search-improved policy: 

LAZ -SFT (ϕ) = −Est∼D 

X

> a∈A t

πMCTS (a | st) log πϕ(a | C t).

For a language model implementation, this is usually approximated by SFT on the selected action string, possibly weighted by the MCTS visit count: 

LSFT (ϕ) = −wt

X

> j∈y(at)

log πϕ(yj (at) | C t, y <j (at)) .

This objective is simple, but it treats the planner output as a label to imitate. It does not directly encode whether the chosen action is better or worse than the current value baseline, and the update direction is always to increase the likelihood of the supervised target. As a result, a noisy MCTS target early in training can be copied into the LLM prior, and the loss has no clipped policy-improvement mechanism to control update size. PriorZero instead optimizes a clipped policy-gradient objective over the stored action tokens: 

ρt,j (ϕ) = exp(log πϕ(yj | C t, y <j ) − log πϕold (yj | C t, y <j )) ,

LPZ (ϕ) = −Et,j 

h

mt,j min 



ρt,j ˆAfinal  

> t

, clip( ρt,j , 1 − ϵlow , 1 + ϵhigh ) ˆAfinal 

> t

i 

+ βD KL (πϕ∥πϕref ).

Here mt,j is the action-token mask; when CoT is used, reasoning-prefix tokens receive a smaller weight wcot so that the RL signal focuses on the final action while still preserving the structured reasoning format. Positive advantages increase the probability of actions whose TD target exceeds the baseline, while negative advantages decrease actions that underperform the baseline. Thus the LLM is not merely distilled from MCTS; it is updated according to whether the action actually improved the world-model value estimate under environment feedback. 

Fusion of the LLM prior and world-model policy. The implementation fuses the two policies in probability space rather than adding raw logits. This is important because LLM prompt log-probabilities and world-model policy logits have different scales. Concretely, invalid actions are first masked out, the LLM scores are temperature-normalized over the admissible action set, and the world-model logits are separately converted to πWM . The fused root logits are then obtained by taking the logarithm of a convex mixture: 

ℓroot (a) = log  λWM πWM (a | zt) + (1 − λWM )πT

> LLM

(a | C t) + ϵ .

19 The default experiments use a fixed mixture with λWM = 0 .5. The code also supports an adaptive variant that sets the LLM coefficient from the normalized entropy of the world-model root policy: 

αt = αmin + ( αmax − αmin )



1 − H(πWM (· | zt)) log |A t|



, Proot = (1 − αt)πWM + αtπT

> LLM

.

In all modes, the fusion is applied only at the root node. This design reflects three implementation considerations. First, the root state corresponds to a real textual observation, so the LLM prior is semantically grounded there; deeper MCTS nodes are imagined latent states and may not have faithful textual descriptions. Second, root-only fusion prevents the LLM from overwriting the world model’s action-conditioned dynamics during multi-step lookahead. Third, the fused root distribution affects the world model indirectly through data and MCTS visit-count targets, while gradients remain separated: the world model learns from collected trajectories and search targets, and the LLM learns from value advantages computed after replay sampling. This keeps the LLM-prior and WM-policy roles complementary: the LLM proposes where search should begin, and the world model decides which branches are valuable through latent planning. 

B.2 Jericho Details B.2.1 Environment Details 

We evaluate on four Jericho text adventure games spanning a range of difficulty levels. Table 3 lists the games with their action space sizes and maximum episode lengths as configured in the codebase. Table 3: Jericho games information, with per-game action space size and maximum episode steps.                

> Game Game File Action Space Size Max Steps
> Detective detective.z5 12 100 OmniQuest omniquest.z5 25 100 Acorn Court acorncourt.z5 45 50 Zork I zork1.z5 55 500

Each game is trained independently (single-task), with 2 evaluator environments running in parallel. 

B.2.2 Additional Training Curves 

During alternating training, the LLM module itself undergoes progressive improvement. Figure 8 shows the LLM’s standalone policy performance across training, illustrating how the world model’s value estimates serve as effective supervision signals for LLM adaptation. 

Figure 8: Standalone LLM policy performance during PriorZero’s alternating training across four Jericho environments. The LLM policy quality improves progressively with each alternating fine-tuning cycle, demonstrating that the world model’s value estimates provide effective signals for LLM adaptation. Periodic dips correspond to the beginning of new fine-tuning cycles before the LLM re-adapts. 

B.2.3 Root-Prior Injection Analysis 

Figure 4 compares the MCTS root-node visit distribution entropy between PriorZero and UniZero during training, and Figure 9 presents qualitative studies of the prior fusion process at the root node. 20 Two-phase entropy dynamics. The entropy curves in Figure 4 exhibit a characteristic two-phase pattern that goes beyond a simple “lower entropy = better search” interpretation. In the early phase ,PriorZero’s root-node entropy is lower than UniZero’s: the LLM prior provides an informative initial search direction, allowing the agent to concentrate visits on semantically meaningful actions instead of repeatedly revisiting low-value branches. In the large admissible-action space of zork1 , such directional guidance is crucial for avoiding inefficient or cyclic exploration before the world model has learned reliable value estimates. As training proceeds, PriorZero maintains comparable or higher returns while its root-node entropy rises above UniZero’s. This reversal indicates that root-prior fusion does not collapse search onto the most likely action; rather, the LLM prior guides MCTS toward semantically plausible regions while still leaving sufficient room to compare alternative actions through world-model rollouts. In this sense, root-prior injection improves exploration quality :it filters out obviously unproductive directions early, and later prevents the search distribution from being dominated by brittle world-model preferences. In the final phase of training (last 20% of evaluations), PriorZero attains a substantially higher mean return than UniZero on zork1 .

Action-level case study. Figure 9 illustrates this effect at the action level. In the game history, the agent repeatedly enters a closet to the north and returns south, forming an unproductive loop, while the current observation indicates that moving west leads back to the hallway. The LLM assigns most probability mass to west , whereas the world model still favors north . Root-prior fusion therefore redirects MCTS toward the appropriate action and helps break the dead-loop exploration pattern. More generally, these examples show that LLM priors can provide useful initial directions for MCTS, especially when the learned world model has not yet distinguished productive actions from locally repetitive but low-value behavior. 

B.3 BabyAI Details 

BabyAI tests whether PriorZero generalizes beyond text-based games. Compared with Jericho, BabyAI differs in three dimensions that interact with our method: it provides structured natural-language observations (rather than free-form text), high-level semantic actions (rather than verb-object commands), and a continuous shaped reward (rather than sparse integer scores). It is also a multi-task benchmark—a single agent is trained across 18 levels simultaneously, in contrast to Jericho where each game is trained independently. The remainder of this subsection details the environment interface, the level set, BabyAI-specific implementation choices, and per-level results. 

B.3.1 Environment and Platform 

BabyAI Chevalier-Boisvert et al. [2019] is a grid-world platform built on MiniGrid that serves as a representative setting for embodied tasks. It features procedurally generated rooms with colored objects (balls, keys, boxes, doors) and natural-language mission specifications. Agents navigate rooms, move objects, unlock doors, and interact with the environment in response to textual commands. We use the AgentGym Xi et al. [2025a] HTTP server to interface with BabyAI environments. The server exposes a REST API ( /create , /reset , /step , /close ) that manages multiple concurrent environment instances. Each /reset call accepts a data_idx parameter encoding both the level identity and random seed: level_id = data_idx mod 40 + 1 , seed = ⌊data_idx /40 ⌋.

Observation Space. The AgentGym server converts BabyAI’s raw 7×7×3 grid observation into a structured natural-language description. The description includes: (1) visible objects with their colors, types, and relative positions (e.g., “There is a red ball 1 right in front of you 3 steps away”); (2) wall/barrier distances; (3) the agent’s carrying status; and (4) the mission goal (e.g., “Your goal: go to the red ball”). This text is tokenized by a BGE-base-en-v1.5 encoder (max sequence length 512) for the world model, and presented as-is to the LLM. 

Action Space. We use the server’s high-level semantic actions , which abstract over low-level movement primitives (turn left/right, move forward, pickup, drop, toggle). The server computes reachable actions via BFS path planning at each step, producing a dynamic action space of 3–15 actions such as “go to red ball 1”, “pickup blue key 1”, “toggle and go through green closed door 1”. This is analogous to Jericho’s valid_actions but with smaller branching factor. The maximum action space size is padded to 20 for the world model’s fixed-size policy head. 21 === GAME HISTORY === 

Step 1:

Observation : << Outside >>You are outside in the cold . To the east is a dead end . To the west is the rest of the street . Papers are blowing 

around . It's amazingly cold for this time of year .

Action : west Reward : 10 .0

Step 2:

Observation: << Outside >>You are still on the streets. To the north is a restraunt where the mayor ate often. To the east is the Mayor's 

home.[Your score has just gone up by ten points.] 

Action: east Reward: 10.0 

Step 3:

Observation: << Mayor's house >>You are in the house, at the scene of the crime. You enter and flash your badge before a cop. He admits 

you. To the north is the upstairs. To the east is the living room and to the west is the dining room.[Your score has just gon e u p by ten points.] 

Action: east Reward: 0.0 

Step 4:

Observation: << Living room >>You are standing in the living room. You see a battered piece of wood. You wonder "Should I pick this 

thing up?". Well, whether you do or don't the only way out of the room is back west.You can see a wooden wood here. 

Action: west Reward: 0.0 

Step 5:

Observation: << Mayor's house >>You are in the house, at the scene of the crime. You enter and flash your badge before a cop. He admits 

you. To the north is the upstairs. To the east is the living room and to the west is the dining room. 

Action: north Reward: 10.0 

Step 6:

Observation: << Upstairs hallway >>You are in the hallway of the large house of the mayor. It is an amazingly large house. You can go 

north, south, east or west.[Your score has just gone = 0.95 up by ten points.] 

Action: north Reward: 0.0 

Step 7:

Observation: << Hallway >>You are at the end of the hallway. To the north is a room, while to the west is the rest of the hallway. 

Action: north Reward: 0.0 

Step 8:

Observation: << Closet >>You are in a closet. There is no reason to be in here. Go south. 

Action: south Reward: 0.0 

Step 9: 

Observation: << Hallway >>You are at the end of the hallway. To the north is a room, while to the west is the rest of the hallway. 

Action: North Reward: 0.0 

Step 10: 

Observation: << Closet >>You are in a closet. There is no reason to be in here. Go south. 

Action: South Reward: 0.0 

=== CURRENT OBSERVATION === 

<< Hallway >>You are at the end of the hallway. To the north is a room, while to the west is the rest of the hallway. 

=== Action Probability Distributions === 

LLM: 𝜋 𝑙𝑙𝑚 𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑡 = 0.03 , 𝜋 𝑙𝑙𝑚 𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑡ℎ = 0.02, 𝝅 𝒍𝒍𝒎 𝒘𝒆𝒔𝒕 = 𝟎 . 𝟗𝟓 

World Model: 𝜋 𝑤𝑚 𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑡 = 0.17 , 𝝅 𝒘𝒎 𝒏𝒐𝒓𝒕𝒉 = 𝟎 . 59 , π𝑤𝑚 𝑤𝑒𝑠𝑡 = 0.24 Figure 9: Case study of root-node prior fusion. The LLM assigns high probability to west , while the world model still favors north ; fusion redirects MCTS toward the action that breaks the north–south dead loop. 

Reward Structure. BabyAI uses a continuous reward r = 1 − 0.9 · (t/T max ) upon task completion, where t is the number of steps taken and Tmax is the maximum episode length. Failed episodes receive r = 0 . This provides denser feedback than Jericho’s sparse integer scores, but still requires efficient planning since reward decays with step count. 

B.3.2 Task Selection 

Following AgentGym-RL Xi et al. [2025b], we train and evaluate on 18 out of 40 BabyAI levels. Table 4 lists all 18 levels grouped by task category. 

B.3.3 Implementation and Configuration 

Table 5 lists the key hyperparameters and environment settings used in the Jericho and BabyAI experiments. 

LLM Inference Configuration. Table 6 summarizes the LLM inference parameters. Both environ-ments use vLLM Kwon et al. [2023] for batched inference with DeepSpeed ZeRO-2 for training. 

Action Prior Extraction Pipeline. The action prior extraction does not parse free-form LLM output. Instead, it uses vLLM’s prompt_logprobs feature to compute the conditional log-probability of each candidate action given the prompt context. For each valid action ai in the current state: 22 Table 4: The 18 BabyAI levels used for training and evaluation, following the AgentGym-RL protocol. Levels span four task categories of increasing compositional complexity. 

ID Level Name Description 

Navigation (11 levels) 

1 GoToRedBallGrey Navigate to a red ball in a grey room 2 GoToRedBall Navigate to a red ball with distractors 3 GoToRedBallNoDists Navigate to a red ball without distractors 4 GoToObjS6 Navigate to a named object in a 6 ×6 room 5 GoToLocalS8N7 Navigate to a local object (8 ×8, 7 objects) 6 GoToObjMazeS7 Navigate to an object through a 7 ×7 maze 7 GoToImpUnlock Navigate requiring implicit door unlocking 8 GoToSeqS5R2 Sequential navigation to two objects 9 GoToRedBlueBall Navigate to a red or blue ball 10 GoToDoor Navigate to a specified door 11 GoToObjDoor Navigate to an object or door by description 

Pickup (3 levels) 

19 PickupLoc Pick up an object specified by location 20 PickupDistDebug Pick up an object with distractors (debug) 21 PickupAbove Pick up an object above another object 

Interaction (2 levels) 

30 ActionObjDoor Perform a specified action on an object or door 31 FindObjS7 Find a hidden object across multiple rooms 

Compositional (2 levels) 

33 OneRoomS20 Complete a task in a large 20 ×20 single room 36 SynthLoc Synthesized multi-step task with location constraints 

Table 5: Hyperparameters and environment settings for the Jericho and BabyAI experiments. 

Parameter Jericho BabyAI 

LLM model Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct Environment interface Local Python API HTTP (AgentGym server) Action space size 10–100+ 3–15 (high-level) Max episode steps 50–500 20 Reward type Sparse integer Continuous [0 , 1] 

KL coefficient 0.01 0.1 Entropy bonus 0.0 0.001 WM update iters 2000 500 LLM update iters 200 100 MCTS sims (collect) 25 25 MCTS sims (eval) 25 50 Fusion weight α 0.5 0.5 CoT loss weight wcot 0.1 0.1 LLM learning rate 1 × 10 −6 1 × 10 −6

Train batch size 128 128 Micro train batch size 4 2Replay buffer size 3 × 10 5 5 × 10 5

WM batch size 64 64 WM learning rate 3 × 10 −4 3 × 10 −4

Text encoder BGE-base-en-v1.5 BGE-base-en-v1.5 # training tasks 4 (single-task) 18 (multi-task) 

23 Table 6: LLM inference and training infrastructure parameters.                                                       

> Parameter Jericho BabyAI
> vLLM Inference
> Sampling temperature 1.0 1.0 Top-p0.95 0.95 Prompt max length 8192 4096 Generate max length 512 512 Log-prob reduction mean mean Tensor parallel size (3B) 1—Tensor parallel size (7B) 22GPU memory utilization (3B) 0.25 —GPU memory utilization (7B) 0.35 0.35 Prefix caching off off
> CoT Generation
> CoT temperature 1.0 1.0 CoT top-p1.0 1.0 CoT max tokens 512 512 CoT stop tokens "\n\n" "\n\n"
> CoT enabled by default Yes Yes
> DeepSpeed Training
> ZeRO stage 22Gradient clipping 1.0 1.0 Adam (β1, β 2)(0.9, 0.95) (0.9, 0.95) Weight decay 0.01 0.01 LR scheduler cosine w/ min cosine w/ min LR warmup ratio 0.03 0.03 PPO clip (ϵlow , ϵ high )(0.2, 0.2) (0.2, 0.2) KL estimator k3 k3 Format reward weight 0.5 0.3 Advantage normalization global batch global batch

1. Prompt construction : The system prompt and user prompt are concatenated via the tokenizer’s chat template. If CoT is enabled, a CoT prefix (generated in a separate vLLM call) is prepended to the action text. 2. Full sequence assembly : The prompt token IDs are concatenated with the label token IDs: 

[prompt_ids ; label_ids ], where label_ids encodes either “ Action: <action> <eos>” (no CoT) or “ <cot_prefix> <action> <eos>” (with CoT). 3. Scoring : All sequences are submitted to vLLM in a single batch with prompt_logprobs=1 and 

max_tokens=1 . The per-token log-probabilities of the label portion are extracted and averaged (reduction=mean ) to produce the action score: s(ai) = 1

> |Li|

P 

> j∈Li

log p(tj | t<j ).4. Prior distribution : The scores {s(ai)} form the LLM prior in log-probability space. Temperature scaling ( TJericho =1 .0, TBabyAI =1 .0) is applied before fusion with the world model’s policy logits at the MCTS root node. This prompt-logprobs approach avoids the fragility of regex-based output parsing and provides calibrated probability estimates over the full action vocabulary. 

Format Reward. When CoT is enabled, a binary format reward rfmt ∈ { 0, 1} is set to 1 iff the LLM output strictly matches Reasoning: <analysis> \n Action: <action> with exactly one occurrence of each keyword. Following the blending introduced in §3.3, the final advantage is 

ˆAfinal = (1 − λfmt ) ˆA + λfmt rfmt , with λfmt =0 .5 for Jericho and λfmt =0 .3 for BabyAI. 

Multi-Task Training. Unlike Jericho where each game is trained independently, BabyAI follows the AgentGym-RL multi-task protocol: a single agent is trained across all 18 levels simultaneously. During collection, levels are sampled uniformly at random; during evaluation, all 18 levels are cycled deterministically to ensure complete coverage. 24 LLM Prompt Design. The BabyAI-specific system prompt (Figure 12) instructs the LLM as “an expert agent navigating a BabyAI grid-world environment” and enumerates the six avail-able high-level action types: basic movement (turn left/right, move forward), navigation ( go to <obj> <id> ), object interaction ( pick up <obj> <id> ), and door operations ( go through ,

toggle and go through , toggle ). The user prompt includes the action history with re-wards ( history_with_reward=True ), the current observation, and the list of valid actions (observation_with_valid_actions=True ). When CoT is enabled (default for BabyAI), the LLM produces a “Reasoning” section analyzing the observation and goal before outputting the chosen action. 

Baselines. The UniZero baseline uses the identical world model architecture (2-layer transformer, 

d=768 , 24 heads) and MCTS configuration but without any LLM module. All world-model hyperpa-rameters are kept identical to PriorZero for a fair ablation. 

Hardware and Wall-Clock Time. All experiments are run on NVIDIA H200 GPUs. For Jericho ,each single-task run uses 4 H200 GPUs (4-way DDP) with the Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct backbone; one full run reaches 50 k environment steps in approximately 35 wall-clock hours. For BabyAI-18 ,each multi-task run uses 4 H200 GPUs (2-way DDP combined with vLLM tensor parallelism for the Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct model); one full run reaches 100 k environment steps in approximately 48 

wall-clock hours. The higher per-step cost on BabyAI is dominated by the larger 7B LLM and the multi-task setting (18 levels sampled per iteration); the higher absolute step count required by BabyAI partially offsets the per-step gain. 

Computational cost comparison. Table 7 summarizes the per-iteration compute profile of each paradigm under equivalent environment budgets. Table 7: Approximate per-iteration compute breakdown on Jericho (Qwen2.5-3B, 4 ×GPU).                 

> Component Naive RLFT (P2) PriorZero UniZero
> LLM forward (rollout) Every step Root only —LLM backward (training) Every iteration Every K-th WM iter —WM forward/backward —Every iteration Every iteration Reference model memory Yes (frozen copy) Yes (frozen copy) —

PriorZero’s LLM compute is concentrated in two places: (1) a single forward pass per MCTS root node during rollout (amortized over the ∼50 MCTS simulations that follow without LLM involvement), and (2) PPO updates on the LLM every K world-model iterations during training. Because the alternating schedule performs far fewer LLM gradient steps than Naive RLFT (which updates the LLM at every iteration), PriorZero’s total LLM training cost is a fraction of P2’s despite using the same model size. The world-model component (2-layer transformer, d=768 ) adds negligible overhead relative to the LLM. 

B.3.4 Per-Level Evaluation Curves Per-Level Curves. Fig. 10 presents detailed curves for all 18 BabyAI levels, complementing the aggregated return comparison in the main text (Figure 6). We show a three-way comparison: 

PriorZero uses the full framework (world model + root-level LLM prior + MCTS); the standalone LLM policy (labeled “PriorZero (LLM-only)” in the figure legend) keeps the same fine-tuned LLM module but evaluates with the LLM policy alone (no world-model lookahead / MCTS); and UniZero 

is the world-model baseline without any LLM prior. This decomposition isolates (i) how much the world model and planning contribute beyond the LLM’s standalone behavior, and (ii) how much the LLM prior contributes beyond UniZero’s planning. 

Where Does the World Model Contribute Beyond the LLM? Comparing PriorZero against the standalone LLM policy isolates the gain from world-model planning, which scales with task compositionality: • Compositional / multi-room tasks (GoToObjMazeS7 , OneRoomS20 , ActionObjDoor ,

FindObjS7 , PickupAbove ): the standalone LLM fails outright (return ≈0), while the full stack 25 0.0 

> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Return

L1: GoToRedBallGrey L2: GoToRedBall L3: GoToRedBallNoDists 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Return

L4: GoToObjS6 L5: GoToLocalS8N7 L6: GoToObjMazeS7 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Return

L7: GoToImpUnlock L8: GoToSeqS5R2 L9: GoToRedBlueBall 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Return

L10: GoToDoor L11: GoToObjDoor L19: PickupLoc 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Return

L20: PickupDistDebug L21: PickupAbove L30: ActionObjDoor      

> 0k 20k 40k 60k 80k 100k

Env Steps 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Return

L31: FindObjS7      

> 0k 20k 40k 60k 80k 100k

Env Steps 

L33: OneRoomS20      

> 0k 20k 40k 60k 80k 100k

Env Steps 

L36: SynthLoc   

> PriorZero PriorZero (LLM-only) UniZero

Figure 10: Per-level return on all 18 BabyAI levels. Each subplot shares a common x-axis (Env Steps, obtained by the data collector step counter) and y-axis (return in [0 , 1] ). Curves are means over two seeds; shaded bands span the min–max envelope across seeds. Red: PriorZero . Orange (dashed): 

PriorZero (LLM-only) — the fine-tuned LLM policy alone. Blue: UniZero . The three categories at the top are Navigation (L1–L11), Pickup (L19–L21), and Interaction/Compositional (L30–L36). 26 reaches ≥0.90 . These tasks require ordered sub-goal sequences that open-loop LLM sampling cannot plan; MCTS lookahead through the learned world model is the decisive signal. • Navigation with distractors (GoToRedBallGrey , GoToRedBall , GoToRedBlueBall ): the stan-dalone LLM achieves 0.4–0.7 but is unstable, whereas the full stack sits consistently above 0.88 .The LLM identifies the right object class; world-model value bootstrapping disambiguates among visually similar candidates. • Easy single-object tasks (GoToRedBallNoDists , GoToDoor , GoToLocalS8N7 , PickupLoc ,

PickupDistDebug ): the standalone LLM already saturates ( ≥0.87 ); the world model adds at most a few points. The full stack pays no tax on easy levels. 

Where Does the LLM Prior Help on Top of UniZero? Comparing PriorZero against UniZero isolates the gain from injecting the LLM prior at the MCTS root. The most striking case is SynthLoc 

(L36), where UniZero’s mean return collapses to 0.0 while PriorZero reaches 0.96 : the level uses locative compositional instructions (“next to”, “to the left of”) that benefit disproportionately from LLM grounding. Smaller gains ( +5 to +13 points) appear on GoToRedBallGrey , GoToRedBall ,

GoToRedBlueBall , and PickupLoc , where the action space contains near-synonymous candidates that the world model alone cannot cheaply discriminate. 

Anomalies. Three levels deserve flagging. GoToImpUnlock (L7) requires implicit door unlocking; both UniZero and all PriorZero variants stall near 0 within ∼ 100 k env steps, suggesting longer training or an explicit intermediate-reward curriculum is needed. SynthLoc (L36) is the clearest case where the LLM prior is necessary , not merely accelerating: random exploration never grounds locative phrases, but the frozen LLM vocabulary supplies this grounding for free. FindObjS7 (L31) is the only level where UniZero slightly edges out PriorZero ( 0.995 vs. 0.960 ); both saturate and the gap is within UniZero’s seed variation. 

## C Detailed Related Work 

C.1 Pre-training in Reinforcement Learning 

To address the issues of low sample efficiency and poor generalization in high-dimensional observa-tion spaces, recent studies have explored integrating self-supervised pre-training and representation learning into reinforcement learning (RL). These approaches aim to improve policy learning and gen-eralization through unsupervised or cross-task representations. Early work on World Models [Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018] demonstrated the potential of representation pre-training for improving sample efficiency by learning a generative model of environment dynamics in a latent space and training control policies on top of it. In the visual domain, CURL [Laskin et al., 2020] leverages contrastive learning to extract visual features from pixel observations, alleviating the representation bottleneck in RL. Seo et al. [Seo et al., 2022] propose action-free video pre-training, where environment dynamics are first learned from large-scale unlabeled videos and then fine-tuned with action-conditioned world models in downstream tasks, while intrinsic rewards are constructed from latent representations to guide exploration. PIE-G [Yuan et al., 2022] transfers ImageNet-pretrained encoders to RL and achieves cross-environment zero-shot generalization. VIP [Ma et al., 2022] formulates representation learning as conditional value function estimation and extracts temporally smooth implicit values from third-person videos to provide dense unsupervised rewards. ContextWM [Wu et al., 2023] further im-proves robustness and transferability in real-world video data by explicitly disentangling background and dynamic information through a context encoder. In text-based environments, Dynalang [Lin et al., 2024] trains world models on large-scale text corpora and performs planning and policy optimization in the latent space, enabling task priors without explicit environment interaction. Starling [Basavatia et al., 2024] leverages large language models (LLMs) to generate self-supervised signals that guide sample-efficient policy learning in text-based environments. Different from these approaches, PriorZero does not rely on additional representation pre-training or cross-modal datasets. Instead, it directly incorporates LLM priors into the world-model planning process—the world model is trained online from scratch while the LLM prior is adapted in-the-loop, avoiding the granularity mismatch (P3 in §2) that arises when LLMs are used as dynamics models. 27 C.2 Leveraging LLM Priors in Reinforcement Learning 

With the emergence of large language models (LLMs) that possess strong world knowledge and reasoning capabilities, recent research has explored leveraging them to assist reinforcement learning agents. Li et al. [Li et al., 2022] first introduced pretrained language models to provide commonsense priors for state understanding and action selection in text-based games. Huang et al. [Huang et al., 2022] propose using LLMs as zero-shot planners that generate executable high-level action sequences from textual prompts to guide embodied agents. SayCan [Ahn et al., 2022] further combines LLM reasoning with value function estimation to improve the success rate of robotic task execution. Beyond planning, LLMs have also been used to guide exploration. The ELLM framework [Cao et al., 2024] generates semantically meaningful sub-goals with language models and uses them as exploration rewards to make policy learning more goal-directed. Inner Monologue [Huang et al., 2022] demonstrates that LLM-generated “internal monologues” can coordinate multiple modules in embodied systems. DLLM [Liu et al., 2024] embeds LLM-generated sub-goals into model-based RL simulations and assigns higher rewards to trajectories consistent with language prompts, thereby improving exploration efficiency in long-horizon tasks. Shi et al. [Shi et al., 2025] further incorporate LLMs directly into Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), where candidate actions generated by LLMs guide planning in text-based games. In contrast to these methods—which span paradigms P1 (Naive Policy: [Huang et al., 2022, Ahn et al., 2022]), P4 (Text Encoder: [Li et al., 2022]), and LLM-guided exploration/search ([Cao et al., 2024, Liu et al., 2024, Shi et al., 2025])— PriorZero integrates LLM priors with a learnable world model through root-only injection and alternating fine-tuning. This enables the agent to continuously refine its decision-making policy through environment interaction while keeping dynamics learning uncontaminated by token-level bias. 

C.3 Reinforcement Learning for Fine-Tuning LLMs 

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) has become the dominant paradigm for aligning large language models. Christiano et al. [Christiano et al., 2017] first proposed learning re-ward models from human preferences and optimizing policies accordingly. Ziegler et al. [Ziegler et al., 2019] applied this framework to language model summarization, and Stiennon et al. [Stiennon et al., 2020] further validated its effectiveness on long-form summarization tasks. InstructGPT [Ouyang et al., 2022] extended RLHF to large-scale models with tens of billions of parameters, combining PPO optimization with human preference data to significantly improve instruction-following behavior. To reduce the cost of human annotations, Constitutional AI [Bai et al., 2022] and RLAIF [Lee et al., 2023] replace human feedback with AI-generated preferences or LLM-based reward scoring, achiev-ing competitive performance across multiple tasks. In decision-making scenarios, Reinforcement Learning Fine-Tuning (RLFT) has been explored to improve multi-step decision capabilities of LLMs. Schmied et al. [Schmied et al., 2025] systematically study the effects of RLFT on decision-making behaviors and show that RLFT can mitigate greedy tendencies and the “knowing–doing gap” in LLMs. However, their experiments are mainly limited to short-horizon tasks such as bandits and tic-tac-toe. Recent works further combine self-play or search mechanisms to generate high-quality training signals. For example, rStar-Math [Guan et al., 2025] performs deep exploration in reasoning space via Monte Carlo Tree Search and filters correct reasoning paths using code execution feedback to construct high-quality process supervision data for RFT. STAIR [Zhang et al., 2025] fine-tunes models on reasoning chains containing introspective reasoning under safety constraints for alignment. Unlike these methods, PriorZero constructs reinforcement learning advantage signals using value estimates generated during world-model planning. This provides low-variance training feedback that resolves the credit-assignment failure limiting end-to-end RLFT (P2 in §2) and allows RLFT to scale from short-horizon decision tasks to complex long-horizon environments. 

## D Prompt Template 

PriorZero uses a unified two-stage prompt template to extract semantic action priors from the LLM during rollout, following the structured prior extraction process described in §3.2. The template consists of a system prompt (defining the agent role, environment context, and output format) and a 

user prompt (injecting the interaction history, current observation, and valid actions). The LLM first produces a neutral situation analysis (CoT reasoning), then outputs a probability distribution over 28 candidate actions. Both Jericho and BabyAI share the same prompt skeleton and scoring pipeline— the BabyAI variant inherits all LLM-calling, CoT-generation, and prompt-logprobs scoring logic from the Jericho implementation, overriding only the system prompt and user prompt text to reflect the grid-world domain. Neither environment uses few-shot examples; the prompt relies entirely on zero-shot instruction following. Figure 11 shows the Jericho prompt template, and Figure 12 shows the BabyAI variant. Red placeholders are filled at each step with the current observation, action history, and valid action list. System  Prompt                                                                         

> You are an expert player in atext -based adventure game .Your goal is to maximize the score by choosing
> the optimal next action .Please analyze the game history and current observation to decide the single best
> next action .
> OUTPUT FORMAT :
> You MUST produce exactly TWO parts in the following order :
> 1.Reasoning :Analyze the current situation, available actions, constraints, and uncertainties .Do NOT reveal
> the final choice here .
> 2.Action :The final chosen action .
> Strict Format Example :Reasoning :<detailed_analysis >\nAction :<single_action >

User  Prompt :                               

> === GAME HISTORY ==="
> Step 1:
> Observation :{historical observation 1}
> Action :{historical action 1}
> Reward :{historical reward 1}
> ...
> Step 10 :
> Observation: {historical observation 2}
> Action: {historical action 2}
> Reward: {historical reward 2}
> === CURRENT OBSERVATION ===
> {current observation}
> === INSTRUCTION ===
> Please analyze the situation and provide your response in the following format :
> Reasoning: < detailed_analysis >\n Action: < single_action >

Figure 11: Prompt template for extracting semantic action priors from the LLM in Jericho environ-ments. Red text indicates placeholders filled with task-specific content (game description, current observation, valid actions). The template enforces a two-stage generation: first a neutral situation analysis (CoT reasoning), then a probability distribution over candidate actions. 29 System Prompt: 

You are an expert agent navigating a BabyAI grid-world environment. You are placed in rooms and must accomplish goals by choosing optimal actions. Available action types: – turn left / turn right / move forward: basic movement – go to <obj> <id> : navigate to a specific object – pick up <obj> <id> : pick up an object – go through <door> <id> : go through an open door – toggle and go through <door> <id> : open and go through a closed/locked door (locked doors require a matching color key) – toggle: open/close a door directly in front of you Your goal is to complete the given task efficiently to maximize your score. OUTPUT FORMAT: You MUST produce exactly TWO parts in the following order: 1. Reasoning: Analyze the current observation, your position, nearby objects, and which action best progresses toward the goal. 2. Action: The final chosen action (must be one of the valid actions). Strict Format Example: Reasoning: <detailed_analysis> 

Action: <single_action> 

User Prompt: 

=== ACTION HISTORY === Step 1: Observation: <obs_text_1> 

Action: <action_1> 

Reward: <reward_1> 

. . . === CURRENT OBSERVATION === 

<current_obs_text> 

[Valid Actions] Choose from: ‘go to red ball 1’, ‘pick up blue key 1’, ... 

=== INSTRUCTION === Analyze the observation and provide your response: Reasoning: <detailed_analysis> 

Action: <single_action> 

Figure 12: Prompt template for extracting semantic action priors from the LLM in BabyAI 

environments. The template shares the same two-stage structure as the Jericho variant (Fig-ure 11), with three key differences: (1) the system prompt enumerates BabyAI’s high-level semantic action types; (2) the user prompt includes valid actions by default (controlled by 

observation_with_valid_actions=True ); (3) CoT reasoning is enabled by default. Red text indicates placeholders filled at each step. 30 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The abstract and introduction accurately describe our contributions: root-prior injection for MCTS guidance and alternating fine-tuning for LLM adaptation, validated on Jericho and BabyAI benchmarks. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A [No] or [N/A] answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We acknowledge that our evaluation is limited to text-based (Jericho) and grid-world (BabyAI) environments with discrete action spaces. The conclusion notes this scope and the commented future-work direction (multimodal embodied settings) reflects an acknowledged limitation. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper has no limitation while the answer [No] means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate “Limitations” section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

31 Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [N/A] Justification: This paper does not include theoretical results. Our contributions are algorith-mic and empirical. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide full implementation details in Appendix B, including hyperparam-eters (Table 5), prompt templates (Figures 11 and 12), and training procedures. Code will be released upon acceptance. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a [No] answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in 32 some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We will release our code upon acceptance. The environments (Jericho, BabyAI) are publicly available. Implementation details are provided in Appendix B. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://neurips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so [No] is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //neurips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyperpa-rameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: All training and evaluation details are provided in Section 4 and Appendix B, including hyperparameters, environment configurations, and LLM inference settings. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: Main comparisons (PriorZero vs. UniZero, Figure 3) report shaded regions showing variation across 3 random seeds. Ablation variants that clearly failed (frozen prior, non-alternating, wcot =1 .0, CoT-off, MCTS-off) are reported from a single seed, as documented in the footnote in Section 4. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. 33 • The authors should answer [Yes] if the results are accompanied by error bars, confidence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or plots symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g., negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, the authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: All experiments run on NVIDIA H200 GPUs. Each Jericho run uses 4 H200 GPUs and reaches 50 k environment steps in ∼ 35 wall-clock hours; each BabyAI-18 run uses 4 H200 GPUs and reaches 100 k environment steps in ∼ 48 wall-clock hours. Full hardware and timing details are in Appendix B. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: Our research conforms to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. We use publicly available benchmarks and do not involve human subjects or sensitive data. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer [No], they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? 34 Answer: [N/A] Justification: This is foundational research on RL algorithms. We do not foresee direct negative societal impacts from our method. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer [N/A] or [No], they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate Deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pre-trained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [N/A] Justification: We do not release models or datasets. We use publicly available LLMs (Qwen2.5) and benchmarks (Jericho, BabyAI). Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We cite all assets used: Jericho (MIT License), BabyAI (MIT License), Qwen2.5 (Apache 2.0), BGE-base-en-v1.5 (MIT License), and UniZero/LightZero (Apache 2.0). All are publicly available with permissive open-source licenses. Guidelines: 35 • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We will release code with documentation and an open-source license (Apache 2.0) upon acceptance. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [N/A] Justification: This paper does not involve crowdsourcing or human subjects research. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [N/A] 36 Justification: This paper does not involve human subjects research. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigor, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [Yes] Justification: LLMs (Qwen2.5-3B/7B) are a core component of our method, providing semantic action priors for MCTS planning. We describe their usage in Section 3 and Appendix B. Guidelines: • The answer [N/A] means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy in the NeurIPS handbook for what should or should not be described. 37