Title: CAPE: Contrastive Action-conditioned Parallel Encoding for Embodied Planning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.07304v1

Published Time: Mon, 08 Jun 2026 01:10:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# CAPE: Contrastive Action-conditioned Parallel Encoding for Embodied Planning 

Cong Chen Haowen Wang Zhixiang Zhang Pei Ren Zhengping Che 

# Abstract 

Embodied agents need to predict the future consequences of candidate actions in order to plan effectively before execution. Existing visual dynamics models learn by reconstructing future visual states or rolling out dense latent representations, which spreads learning capacity across visually salient but planning-irrelevant content rather than the action-conditioned changes that drive manipulation outcomes. We propose CAPE, a Contrastive Action-conditioned Parallel Encoding framework that learns visual dynamics by distinguishing the future outcomes induced by different action sequences. Given an initial observation and a candidate action sequence, CAPE decodes the full future latent trajectory in a single forward pass and is trained with a Goal-Convergent Contrastive Objective that aligns predictions corresponding to the same future outcome while separating those corresponding to different outcomes. On real-world DROID and zero-shot transfer to RoboCasa, CAPE substantially outperforms prior baselines on future-state retrieval, offline action matching, and closed-loop planning, while notably reducing planning-time inference cost at long prediction horizons. 

# 1 Introduction 

The ability to predict how the environment will evolve under candidate actions is fundamental to planning for embodied agents in robotic manipulation [ 41 , 18 , 23 , 46 , 15 ]. In vision-based settings, this evolution is manifested as the visual changes induced by candidate actions [ 14 , 33 , 31 ]. Building on this view, recent work has increasingly focused on learning action-conditioned forward dynamics models that predict such visual transitions, providing the backbone of modern model-based embodied planning [13, 11, 9, 10]. Existing approaches to action-conditioned forward dynamics modeling fall broadly into two paradigms [ 1, 30 , 29 ]. Reconstruction-based approaches model forward dynamics through pixel-level prediction from raw visual observations [ 12 , 31 , 23 ]. These methods have achieved strong perfor-mance in simulated reinforcement-learning environments with relatively simple backgrounds and limited visual variation. However, in real-world manipulation scenes, pixel-level reconstruction can force the model to encode task-irrelevant appearance factors [ 43 ], such as shadows, textures, and background clutter, thereby obscuring the underlying action-induced dynamics. Latent predictive approaches instead model forward dynamics directly in the latent spaces of pre-trained visual en-coders such as DINOv2 [ 46 , 4, 39 ]. Representative methods such as DINO-WM show that future patch tokens can be predicted directly in latent space without reconstructing pixels [ 46 ]. However, as illustrated in Figure 1a, most of these methods still rely on step-by-step rollout, requiring the model to generate a full high-dimensional future representation of visual state at every step and recursively use it to predict subsequent states. Supervision defined over the full visual state encourages the model to reproduce large portions of the scene whose evolution is only weakly related to the agent’s actions. By contrast, the action-conditioned changes most relevant to planning are usually confined to a small spatial neighborhood around the end-effector and the manipulated objects, and thus contribute only weakly to the overall training objective. This imbalance leaves the action-conditioned signal weakly represented in the learned features, limiting their reliability for downstream planning.    

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2606.07304v1 [cs.RO] 5 Jun 2026 (a) Autoregressive rollout (b) Ours: Parallel seq-to-seq prediction

Figure 1: Comparison of different future prediction paradigms. (a) Existing latent world models unroll autoregressively, requiring multiple sequential forward passes through Pθ . (b) Our model predicts the entire future latent trajectory (ˆ zt+1 , . . . , ˆzT ) in a single forward pass conditioned on the action sequence and current state zt.Our key insight is that, in embodied planning, action-conditioned future prediction should not be cast as faithful reconstruction of future visual states, but as distinguishing the future outcomes induced by different action sequences. This shifts the supervisory target away from the full visual state and toward the action-conditioned differences that distinguish future outcomes. We realize this principle through a contrastive objective over predicted future-state representations, aligning predictions that correspond to the same future outcome while separating those corresponding to different outcomes. Because much of the visual context in manipulation remains stable over a trajectory, a single initial observation often provides sufficient context for future prediction. This allows the full future trajectory to be decoded in parallel from the action sequence (Figure 1b), removing the need for autoregressive rollout. In this work, we introduce CAPE, a Contrastive Action-conditioned Parallel Encoding framework for visual dynamics prediction. Given an initial observation and an action sequence, CAPE predicts the future latent trajectory in a single forward pass, using the initial observation as shared visual context. It is trained with a Goal-Convergent Contrastive Objective that aligns representations corresponding to the same future outcome. This encourages the latent space to be organized around action-conditioned transitions rather than similarity to full future observations. We evaluate CAPE on the real-world DROID [ 26 ] dataset and on zero-shot transfer to customized manipulation tasks in RoboCasa [ 32 ]. CAPE substantially outperforms prior baselines on future-state retrieval, offline action matching, and closed-loop planning, while remaining significantly more computationally efficient. Our contributions can be summarized as follows: • We propose CAPE, a contrastive action-conditioned framework for parallel visual dynam-ics prediction, which predicts future latent trajectories from a single visual context without autoregressive rollout. • We introduce a Goal-Convergent Contrastive Objective that aligns predictions corresponding to the same future outcome while separating those induced by different action sequences, thereby organizing the latent space around action-conditioned transitions rather than future-state appearance similarity. • We validate CAPE on both real-world and simulated benchmarks, demonstrating leading perfor-mance across multiple retrieval and planning evaluations together with substantially improved inference efficiency. 

# 2 Related Work 

Action-conditioned visual dynamics models. Learning predictive models of environment dynam-ics is a long-standing objective in model-based reinforcement learning and robotic control [ 19 , 25 ], where the model is used to anticipate the consequences of candidate actions before execution. Early methods studied action-conditioned video prediction in Atari and robotic manipulation, learning to generate future frames from past observations and actions [ 33 , 14 ]. These models were later combined with model-predictive control [ 16 ] for visual planning in robotic manipulation [ 13 , 11 ], and large-scale robot datasets such as RoboNet [ 9] improved generalization across robots, objects, and scenes. Beyond pixel-space prediction, latent world models such as PlaNet [ 20 ], Dreamer [ 21 ], 2DreamerV2 [ 22 ], and DreamerV3 [ 23 ] learn compact dynamics from visual inputs and use imagined rollouts for planning or policy learning. More recent work further replaces pixel reconstruction with prediction in pretrained visual feature spaces: DINO-WM [ 46 ] predicts future DINOv2 [ 34 ]features for zero-shot visual planning, while V-JEPA-style world models [ 6, 4] learn predictive joint embeddings and action-conditioned latent dynamics for image-goal planning. These approaches demonstrate the value of visual predictive models at different representation levels [ 7, 37 , 42 ], but typically evaluate future consequences through sequential rollout of dense future states or features. CAPE instead predicts the full future latent trajectory in parallel from the initial visual context and action sequence, emphasizing action-induced transitions rather than autoregressive dense-state prediction. 

Contrastive predictive representation learning. Contrastive learning provides an alternative to reconstruction-based supervision by learning representations that distinguish positive pairs from negative samples. Contrastive Predictive Coding learns temporally predictive features by predicting future latent variables with an InfoNCE objective [ 40 ], while visual contrastive methods such as MoCo [ 24 ] and SimCLR [ 8 ] show that discriminative self-supervision can produce strong image representations without pixel-level reconstruction. Related joint-embedding and non-contrastive approaches, including BYOL [ 17 ], VICReg [ 5], I-JEPA [ 3 ], and V-JEPA [ 6], further show that pre-dictive representation learning can capture semantic structure while avoiding direct image generation. In reinforcement learning and control, auxiliary contrastive representation objectives have been used to improve state abstraction and sample efficiency by encouraging features to capture temporally predictive or controllable factors [ 27 , 2, 28 , 36 , 44 , 45 ]. For visual dynamics learning, this perspective is useful because supervision can be defined by whether a predicted future is consistent with the correct temporal context, action sequence, or outcome, rather than by full visual reconstruction. CAPE adopts a contrastive objective for action-conditioned future prediction, aligning predictions that converge to the same future state while separating mismatched action-conditioned transitions. 

# 3 Methodology 

3.1 Preliminaries 

Our setting is vision-based goal-conditioned planning from image observations. At each time step, an agent receives an image observation ot ∈ RH×W ×3 and executes a continuous action at ∈ Rda ,where da denotes the dimension of the action space. Given a current observation ot and a goal image og , the objective is to produce an action sequence at:t+H−1 = ( at, . . . , a t+H−1) that drives the environment toward the state depicted in og . Training assumes access to a pre-collected offline dataset of robot trajectories without task rewards or task labels. Following recent latent world-model approaches [ 46 , 39 ], we formulate the problem as planning in the latent space of a pre-trained visual encoder. An observation encoder enc ϕ maps each image to a latent representation zt = enc ϕ(ot), and a one-step transition model is unrolled autoregressively to obtain multi-step futures: ˆzt+1 = fθ (zt, a t). By contrast, CAPE uses the encoder output as a dense visual context vt = enc ϕ(ot) and defines fθ as a sequence-level mapping 

ˆzt+1: t+H = fθ (vt, a t:t+H−1), (1) where ˆzt+h ∈ Rd denotes the predicted future-state representation at step t + h, and the full sequence is decoded in a single forward pass. The following subsections instantiate this formulation. Sec. 3.2 presents the CAPE training framework, including goal-convergent pair sampling, the parallel action-query decoder, and goal-convergent contrastive objective. Sec. 3.3 then describes how the trained CAPE model is used as a latent forward model for MPC-based goal-conditioned planning. 

3.2 Contrastive Action-conditioned Parallel Encoding Framework Parallel Action-Query Decoding Architecture. Given an observation ot and a candidate action sequence at:t+H−1, CAPE predicts the future latent trajectory ˆzt+1: t+H in a single forward pass. We first encode the visual observation with a frozen DINOv2 [ 34 ] encoder, and obtain the current visual tokens vt = enc dino (ot). Since these tokens are produced by a generic visual representation 3Figure 2: Overview of CAPE framework. CAPE is trained through a three-stage goal-convergent pipeline. (1) Two intermediate contexts sampled from the same trajectory share the same future target at time t + H. (2) Given each context, CAPE encodes the visual observation into context tokens and maps the corresponding action subsequence into action queries. A parallel action-query decoder attends these queries to the visual context tokens and predicts future latent tokens in parallel. (3) The proposed goal-convergent objective aligns predictions that correspond to the same future target while repelling temporally or behaviorally mismatched predictions. At test time, the predicted final token is compared with the goal token to compute the planning cost. model, we further process them with a lightweight visual context encoder enc ctx , implemented as three self-attention layers: ct = enc ctx (vt). The resulting context tokens ct provide a shared visual context that captures the scene layout, object appearance, and the local configuration from which the future transition starts. Rather than recursively generating the next latent state and feeding it back to predict later states, CAPE maps the action sequence into a set of horizon-indexed action queries. Each action at+i

is first mapped by a linear projection and then combined with a temporal positional embedding, producing queries qt+1: t+H . These queries are passed to a forward dynamics model Fθ , which we implement as a parallel action-query decoder. Specifically, Fθ consists of stacked causal self-attention and cross-attention blocks. The causal self-attention allows each horizon-indexed action query to aggregate information from the corresponding action prefix, while the cross-attention uses the visual context tokens ct as keys and values. The model therefore predicts all future latent tokens in parallel: 

ˆzt+1: t+H = Fθ

 qt+1: t+H , c t

. (2) This architecture removes the need for autoregressive rollout in latent space. In step-wise prediction, early prediction errors are recursively consumed by subsequent steps, making long-horizon planning vulnerable to compounding latent drift. CAPE instead uses the initial observation as a stable visual anchor and uses action queries to attend to the visual context tokens, producing future latent outcomes at all horizons in parallel. This formulation is well suited to manipulation, where most of the scene remains static and planning-relevant changes are localized around the end-effector and manipulated objects. Thus, rather than repeatedly reconstructing full high-dimensional visual states, CAPE learns a compact action-conditioned mapping from the current visual context and candidate actions to the future latent outcomes needed for planning. 

Goal-Convergent Contrastive Objective. Direct supervision on full future visual latents can still be dominated by static or weakly action-dependent scene content. To bias the representation toward action-conditioned outcome differences, we train CAPE with a goal-convergent contrastive objective. For each expert trajectory clip, we sample two different intermediate contexts that lead to the same future target observation ot+H . Specifically, we choose two offsets k1 and k2 and construct two branches, x1 = ( ot+k1 , a t+k1:t+H−1), x 2 = ( ot+k2 , a t+k2:t+H−1), which contain different visual contexts and different remaining action sequences, but converge to the same terminal outcome ot+H .4Passing the two branches through the parallel action-query decoder gives two predicted final latent tokens, ˆz1 

> t+H

= Fθ (q1 

> t+k1+1: t+H

, c t+k1 ), ˆz2 

> t+H

= Fθ (q2 

> t+k2+1: t+H

, c t+k2 ). Since both predictions correspond to the same future outcome, they are treated as a positive pair. We apply a contrastive loss in the projected latent space. Let gϕ(·) be an MLP projection head followed by normalization, and define u1 

> t+H

= gϕ(ˆ z(1)  

> t+H

), u 2 

> t+H

= gϕ(ˆ z(2)  

> t+H

). For notational simplicity, we denote the projected final-horizon representations as u1 and u2 inside the loss. With cosine similarity 

s(·, ·) and temperature τ , the goal-convergent contrastive loss is 

Lgc = − log exp( s(u(1) , u (2) )/τ )exp( s(u(1) , u (2) )/τ ) + P 

> v∈N

exp( s(u(1) , v )/τ ) , (3) with a symmetric term obtained by swapping the two branches. The negative set N contains states that should be distinguished from the target goal, including temporal neighbors from nearby but distinct future time steps, outcomes produced by swapped or mismatched action sequences, and randomly sampled states from other trajectories. Temporal neighbors make the discrimination fine-grained, since they often share most visual content with the target but differ in the precise action-induced outcome. Swapped-action negatives prevent the model from collapsing onto visual context alone by requiring the representation to distinguish different futures reachable from similar observations. Random-state negatives provide broader separation across unrelated scenes and tasks. This objective recasts future prediction supervision from full-state reconstruction to outcome dis-crimination. Rather than requiring the model to faithfully reproduce every component of the future visual state, CAPE learns to align action-conditioned transitions that lead to the same future outcome. Consequently, the learned latent space is organized around goal-convergent dynamics rather than raw visual similarity. 

3.3 Planning with CAPE via Model Predictive Control 

We embed the trained CAPE model as the dynamics model within a Model Predictive Control (MPC) framework. At each environment step, the planner receives the current observation ot and a visual goal observation og . The current observation is encoded into visual context tokens ct, while the goal observation og is mapped through the same visual-context pathway and a lightweight goal projection module, yielding a goal token zg that is aligned with the action-conditioned prediction 

ˆzt+H . The planner then optimizes over a horizon-H action sequence A = {at, . . . , a t+H−1} using the Cross-Entropy Method (CEM). For each sampled candidate sequence A, CAPE predicts the future latent trajectory in a single forward pass, ˆzt+1: t+H = Fθ (qt+1: t+H , c t), using the parallel action-query decoder described in Section 3.2. The candidate is evaluated by the cosine distance in the same projected outcome space used during contrastive training, with ˆut+H = gϕ(ˆ zt+H ) and ug = gϕ(zg ). We define 

Lplan (A) = 1 − ˆu⊤ 

> t+H

ug

∥ˆut+H ∥2∥ug ∥2

. (4) CEM iteratively samples action sequences, selects the elite candidates with the lowest cost, and refits the sampling distribution around them. After optimization, the first action of the best sequence is executed, and the procedure is repeated at the next time step. This planning procedure directly benefits from the structure learned by the goal-convergent contrastive objective. Because the terminal prediction token is trained to distinguish action-conditioned outcomes rather than reconstruct full visual states, the MPC cost is less dominated by action-irrelevant appear-ance variation. Moreover, since all candidate trajectories are evaluated without autoregressive latent rollout, CAPE substantially reduces the computational cost of CEM while avoiding the accumulation of step-wise prediction errors. 54 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Datasets and Tasks. We use DROID [ 26 ] as the primary real-world benchmark for model training, representation analysis, and offline planning evaluation. We design a future-state retrieval task to evaluate whether the learned representations are discriminative, and an offline action-matching task to evaluate the precision of downstream action planning. To evaluate cross-domain generalization, we further use the RoboCasa [ 32 ] simulation environment. RoboCasa [ 32 ] provides diverse household manipulation scenes and enables controlled closed-loop evaluation under visual and task-domain shifts. We follow the zero-shot RoboCasa [ 32 ] evaluation protocol of JEPA-WM [ 39 ], and evaluate on custom pick-and-place tasks defined from teleoperated trajectories, namely “Place” and “Reach”, denoted Rc-Pl and Rc-R. 

Evaluation Protocols. We primarily focus on metrics across the following three dimensions: 1) Hit@K: For future state retrieval task, we evaluate the performance using Hit@K as metrics, which denotes the percentage of queries whose ground-truth future state is ranked within the top-K candidates. 2) Action Score: For real-world offline action matching task on DROID [ 26 ], we follow JEPA-WM [ 39 ] and evaluate action matching between the planned action sequence and the ground-truth action sequence under the same initial and goal observations. The resulting L1 error is inverted and linearly rescaled into Action Score , where higher is better. 3) Model Predictive Control Success Rate(SR ↑): For zero-shot evaluation on RoboCasa [ 32 ], we evaluate the agent’s success rate in reaching the designed goal state under MPC planning. 

Baselines. We compare CAPE against several representative baselines that internally model action-conditioned forward dynamics. These methods are categorized into reconstruction-based, latent predictive, and temporal-contrastive approaches, as illustrated in Tab. 1. For reconstruction-based methods, we include IRIS [ 31 ], which tokenizes visual states with a discrete autoencoder and predicts future tokens conditioned on action autoregressively using a Transformer, and DreamerV3 [ 23 ], which learns categorical latent state representations for imagination-based control. For latent predictive methods, we compare with DINO-WM [ 46 ], V-JEPA-2-AC [ 4 ], and JEPA-WM [ 39 ], which predict fu-ture latent representations rather than reconstructing pixels or visual tokens. For temporal-contrastive methods, we include Premier-TACO [ 45 ], which learns action-conditioned temporal representations through contrastive objectives for downstream policy learning. We also include a zero-action baseline to quantify the contribution of action-conditioned dynamics. To ensure a fair comparison, we use the same evaluation environments and MPC planner configuration as JEPA-WM [ 39 ]. Additional baseline adaptation details and capacity comparisons are provided in Appendix B. 

4.2 Future State Retrieval 

Table 1: Future state retrieval results on the DROID dataset. Models are evaluated at three prediction horizons: t+1 (0.4s), t+3 (1.2s), and t+5 (2.0s), using Hit@1, Hit@5, and Hit@10 as metrics. For Premier-TACO [ 45 ], we train a separate model for each horizon, as its formulation requires a fixed prediction horizon h.                                                                                        

> Method Category Model t+1 (0.4s) t+3 (1.2s) t+5 (2.0s) Hit@1 Hit@5 Hit@10 Hit@1 Hit@5 Hit@10 Hit@1 Hit@5 Hit@10
> Reconstruction IRIS 4.95 90.90 96.84 0.55 30.12 63.35 0.80 8.59 28.50 DreamerV3 5.54 26.22 35.03 2.92 19.76 30.85 2.28 15.65 26.21 Latent Predictive DINO-WM 7.66 70.87 85.73 4.06 26.21 48.91 2.86 15.35 31.89 V-JEPA2 AC 1.23 66.64 84.02 1.07 26.20 49.10 1.47 17.51 37.77 JEPA-WM 5.15 69.15 83.63 4.20 25.21 45.62 3.29 16.13 32.02 Temporal Contrastive Premier-TACO 5.14 28.62 36.06 3.61 16.40 27.99 4.36 14.88 23.14 Non-predictive zero-action 6.07 23.05 33.42 4.08 16.35 24.95 2.52 11.73 18.30
> Ours CAPE 54.11 91.64 96.13 48.27 87.48 95.17 42.97 84.19 93.68

To evaluate action-conditioned predictive representations independently of downstream planning, we evaluate future-state retrieval on held-out DROID [ 26 ] trajectories. Given a current observation and a future action sequence, the model predicts a future state representation, which is then used to retrieve 6the correct future frame from a candidate pool. This task evaluates whether the learned dynamics can produce future representations that are accurate under the specified actions and discriminative among visually similar candidate observations. Tab. 1 shows that CAPE achieves the strongest overall performance among the evaluated methods, with the best results on nearly all reported horizons. We observed that, while prior works exhibit a sharp performance drop as the predictive horizon increases, which is consistent with the accumulation of rollout error over long horizons, the retrieval performance of CAPE degrades much more slowly. Notably, CAPE achieves exceptionally high Hit@1 scores, reaching 54.11% at t + 1 and maintaining 42.97% at t + 5 . In contrast, all other predictive models remain below 8% Hit@1 across the same horizons. These empirical results indicate that the future state representations learned by CAPE remain substantially more discriminative as the horizon increases. Table 2: Downstream Planning Performance. We evaluate offline action matching via Action Score ( ↑) on the DROID dataset and closed-loop zero-shot planning via Success Rate (SR %, ↑) on RoboCasa tasks (Rc-R and Rc-Pl). h denotes the prediction horizon. The baselines are grouped by their underlying representation paradigms.                                                            

> Method DROID (Action Score ↑)Rc-R (SR % ↑)Rc-Pl (SR % ↑)
> h= 3 h= 5 h= 3 h= 5 h= 3 h= 5
> IRIS 22.7 17.7 9.4 4.7 2.4 0.0 DreamerV3 14.3 11.5 4.2 2.3 2.7 0.3 DINO-WM 37.4 24.6 16.8 7.6 26.3 16.3 V-JEPA2 AC 39.6 28.8 20.2 17.3 31.1 20.6 JEPA-WM 44.2 32.8 23.4 18.4 34.4 26.7
> Premier-TACO 11.3 7.6 3.3 1.3 2.6 0.0
> CAPE (Ours) 62.1 56.6 49.0 32.1 28.9 22.5

Table 3: Computational Efficiency of CEM Planning. We report the single MPC decision loop time (in milliseconds ↓) required to evaluate action sequences of length h. All timing evaluations are conducted on a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU.                              

> Method Samples Iter. Total Planning Time (ms) ↓
> h= 1 h= 3 h= 5
> IRIS 300 15 1560 13354 43900 DreamerV3 300 15 26 64 105
> DINO-WM 300 15 1978 11396 20863
> CAPE (Ours) 300 15 335 340 356

4.3 Planning Performance and Efficiency Planning Performance. For all methods, planning is performed with the same CEM-based MPC framework, so that differences reflect the quality and efficiency of the learned world models rather than the planner itself. Tab. 2 summarizes the performance of our framework under two complementary evaluation settings: offline action matching on the real-world DROID [ 26 ] dataset, and closed-loop zero-shot planning in the RoboCasa [ 32 ] simulation environment (Rc-R and Rc-Pl). Across both offline Action Score and online Success Rate metrics, CAPE demonstrates competitive planning accuracy. On the real-world DROID [ 26 ] benchmark, it achieves the highest Action Score at both horizons, and in RoboCasa [ 32 ] it delivers the strongest results on Rc-R while remaining competitive on Rc-Pl. 

Computational Efficiency. Tab. 3 reports the wall-clock time of a single CEM-based MPC decision loop. CAPE is substantially more efficient than autoregressive baselines, while maintaining strong planning performance. Most notably, planning time of our CAPE remains nearly constant as the prediction horizon increases, rising only from 335ms at h = 1 to 356ms at h = 5 . In contrast, autoregressive models such as IRIS [ 31 ] and DINO-WM [ 46 ] become dramatically slower with longer horizons, since each candidate trajectory requires repeated multi-step rollout. Although 7DreamerV3 [ 23 ] is faster in absolute runtime, its planning accuracy is substantially lower than that of CAPE in our evaluations. This suggests that CAPE achieves a more favorable trade-off between planning performance and computational efficiency. These results show that our parallel prediction design of CAPE is considerably better suited to sampling-based planning, where many candidate action sequences must be evaluated within each optimization step. 

Figure 3: Qualitative comparison of multi-step future prediction. Given the same start observation, we compare the multi-step future predictions of our method, with an autoregressive baseline [ 39 ]. CAPE produces more temporally coherent and goal-consistent predictions, better preserving robot configuration over longer horizons. 

Figure 4: Visualization of Action-query attention over visual context. We visualize the cross-attention weights from the action query to the spatial visual context tokens extracted from the input start frame across network depth. 

4.4 Visual Analysis of CAPE Qualitative comparison. To illustrate that CAPE learns compact yet informative representations for action-conditioned future prediction, we visualize multi-step future predictions induced by the same initial observation and action sequence under different prediction paradigms. Specifically, given a start frame and an action sequence of horizon three, we compare the predicted intermediate future states of CAPE with those produced by JEPA-WM, which follows an autoregressive state-by-state rollout paradigm. As shown in Fig. 3, even when the initial observation does not fully reveal the robot arm, CAPE still predicts future representations that capture the correct robot motion across different viewpoints. In contrast, the autoregressive rollout of JEPA-WM incorrectly infers the configuration of the robot arm outside the visible field of view, leading to inconsistent future predictions. This qualitative comparison suggests that the future-state representations learned by CAPE are not only compact, but also encode action-conditioned visual transitions that are essential for modeling future outcomes. 8Attention analysis. To further understand the internal mechanism of CAPE, we visualize the attention distribution from action queries to visual context tokens in the cross-attention layers of the action-query parallel decoder. As shown in Fig. 4, the cross-attention heatmaps reveal a progressive focusing process. In early layers, the action queries mainly ground themselves on the acting agent, namely the robotic gripper. As the network becomes deeper, the attention gradually expands to include the manipulated objects and task-relevant environmental context. This selective spatial attention helps explain why CAPE remains robust to the heavy visual distractors commonly present in the DROID benchmark. Table 4: Ablation Study of CAPE Designs. We evaluate the impact of architectural choices and training strategies on the DROID dataset. All variants are trained under identical settings to ensure a fair comparison. 

Variant Retrieval Hit@5 (%) ↑ Action Score ↑

h = 1 h = 3 h = 5 h = 3 h = 5 

w/o Visual Context Encoder 86.71 82.31 78.04 48.80 46.40 w/o Negative Action Sample 91.62 86.45 82.87 56.11 52.60 Action-Visual Alignment 90.82 86.02 80.19 58.40 55.20 

Full Model 91.64 87.48 84.19 62.08 56.64 4.5 Ablation Study 

We conduct an ablation study on the DROID [ 26 ] dataset to evaluate the contribution of each design choice in our framework. The results are summarized in Tab. 4. Notably, the removal of Visual Context Encoder leads to the most substantial performance degradation, particularly in the Action Score, which drops from 62.08% to 48.8% at h = 3 . This suggests that, although the frozen DINOv2 encoder provides robust visual representations, the subsequent visual self-attention module offers additional refinement that can better adapt these features to action-conditioned transitions modeling and future state prediction. Furthermore, training strategies significantly impact the model’s learned discriminative representa-tion. Excluding Negative Action Samples—constructed via batch-wise action swapping—results in a consistent decline in Action Score, underscoring its importance in helping the contrastive frame-work distinguish between subtle action-conditioned state transitions. Similarly, the Action-Visual Alignment variant, which simplifies the objective by directly aligning the predictive future state with future observation, underperforms the full model. This gap demonstrates that our proposed goal-convergent contrastive objective more effectively captures the intricate dependencies between current observations, actions, and their corresponding future outcomes. 

# 5 Conclusions 

The core contribution of this paper is to reformulate visual dynamics prediction for embodied planning as action-conditioned parallel prediction of future representations, rather than dense autoregressive prediction of future states. We identify that existing latent world models remain limited by two coupled issues: supervision over high-dimensional future visual states emphasizes action-irrelevant scene redundancy, while autoregressive rollout introduces sequential computation overhead and error accumulation. Our proposed CAPE addresses these limitations by using action sequences as temporally ordered queries over a shared visual context and training the resulting future tokens with a goal-convergent contrastive objective. Experiments on DROID and RoboCasa show that CAPE improves future-state retrieval, offline action matching, and closed-loop planning, while reducing the planning cost associated with evaluating multi-step candidate action sequences. These results suggest that organizing predictive representations around action-induced future differences offers a practical direction for more efficient and scalable model-based embodied planning. 9References 

[1] Bo Ai, Stephen Tian, Haochen Shi, Yixuan Wang, Tobias Pfaff, Cheston Tan, Henrik I. Chris-tensen, Hao Su, Jiajun Wu, and Yunzhu Li. A review of learning-based dynamics models for robotic manipulation. Science Robotics , 10(106):eadt1497, 2025. [2] Ankesh Anand, Evan Racah, Sherjil Ozair, Yoshua Bengio, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and R. Devon Hjelm. Unsupervised state representation learning in Atari. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32, pages 8766–8779, 2019. [3] Mahmoud Assran, Quentin Duval, Ishan Misra, Piotr Bojanowski, Pascal Vincent, Michael Rabbat, Yann LeCun, and Nicolas Ballas. Self-supervised learning from images with a joint-embedding predictive architecture. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 15619–15629, 2023. [4] Mido Assran et al. V-JEPA 2: Self-supervised video models enable understanding, prediction and planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09985 , 2025. [5] Adrien Bardes, Jean Ponce, and Yann LeCun. VICReg: Variance-invariance-covariance regular-ization for self-supervised learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,2022. [6] Adrien Bardes, Quentin Garrido, Jean Ponce, Xinlei Chen, Michael Rabbat, Yann LeCun, Mido Assran, and Nicolas Ballas. V-JEPA: Latent video prediction for visual representation learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [7] Jake Bruce, Michael Dennis, Ashley Edwards, Jack Parker-Holder, Yuge Shi, Edward Hughes, Matthew Lai, Aditi Mavalankar, Richie Steigerwald, Chris Apps, et al. Genie: Generative interactive environments. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 4603–4623. PMLR, 2024. [8] Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for contrastive learning of visual representations. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ,pages 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020. [9] Sudeep Dasari, Frederik Ebert, Stephen Tian, Suraj Nair, Bernadette Bucher, Karl Schmeckpeper, Siddharth Singh, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. RoboNet: Large-scale multi-robot learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.11215 , 2019. [10] Frederik Ebert, Chelsea Finn, Alex X. Lee, and Sergey Levine. Self-supervised visual planning with temporal skip connections. In Proceedings of the 1st Annual Conference on Robot Learning ,volume 78 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 344–356. PMLR, 2017. [11] Frederik Ebert, Chelsea Finn, Sudeep Dasari, Annie Xie, Alex Lee, and Sergey Levine. Visual foresight: Model-based deep reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00568 , 2018. [12] Stefano Ferraro, Pietro Mazzaglia, Tim Verbelen, and Bart Dhoedt. FOCUS: Object-centric world models for robotic manipulation. Frontiers in Neurorobotics , 19:1585386, 2025. [13] Chelsea Finn and Sergey Levine. Deep visual foresight for planning robot motion. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , pages 2786–2793, 2017. [14] Chelsea Finn, Ian Goodfellow, and Sergey Levine. Unsupervised learning for physical in-teraction through video prediction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 29, pages 64–72, 2016. [15] Katerina Fragkiadaki, Pulkit Agrawal, Sergey Levine, and Jitendra Malik. Learning visual predictive models of physics for playing billiards. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2016. 10 [16] Carlos E. Garcia, David M. Prett, and Manfred Morari. Model predictive control: Theory and practice—a survey. Automatica , 25(3):335–348, 1989. [17] Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre H. Richemond, Elena Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Mohammad Ghesh-laghi Azar, Bilal Piot, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Rémi Munos, and Michal Valko. Bootstrap your own latent: A new approach to self-supervised learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 21271–21284, 2020. [18] Jun Guo, Xiaojian Ma, Yikai Wang, Min Yang, Huaping Liu, and Qing Li. FlowDreamer: An RGB-D world model with flow-based motion representations for robot manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10075 , 2025. [19] David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Recurrent world models facilitate policy evolution. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 31, pages 2455–2467, 2018. [20] Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 2555–2565. PMLR, 2019. [21] Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to con-trol: Learning behaviors by latent imagination. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. [22] Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering Atari with discrete world models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [23] Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse control tasks through world models. Nature , 640:647–653, 2025. [24] Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 9729–9738, 2020. [25] Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Piotr Milos, Bła˙ zej Osi´ nski, Roy H. Campbell, Krzysztof Czechowski, Dumitru Erhan, Chelsea Finn, Piotr Kozakowski, Sergey Levine, et al. Model-based reinforcement learning for Atari. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. [26] Alexander Khazatsky, Karl Pertsch, Suraj Nair, Ashwin Balakrishna, Sudeep Dasari, Siddharth Karamcheti, Soroush Nasiriany, et al. DROID: A large-scale in-the-wild robot manipulation dataset. In Robotics: Science and Systems , 2024. [27] Thomas Kipf, Elise van der Pol, and Max Welling. Contrastive learning of structured world models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. [28] Michael Laskin, Aravind Srinivas, and Pieter Abbeel. CURL: Contrastive unsupervised rep-resentations for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 5639–5650. PMLR, 2020. [29] Xinqing Li, Xin He, Le Zhang, and Yun Liu. A comprehensive survey on world models for embodied AI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.16732 , 2025. [30] Yang Liu, Weixing Chen, Yongjie Bai, Xiaodan Liang, Guanbin Li, Wen Gao, and Liang Lin. Aligning cyber space with physical world: A comprehensive survey on embodied AI. 

IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , 30(6):7253–7274, 2025. [31] Vincent Micheli, Eloi Alonso, and François Fleuret. Transformers are sample-efficient world models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [32] Soroush Nasiriany, Abhiram Maddukuri, Lance Zhang, Adeet Parikh, Aaron Lo, Abhishek Joshi, Ajay Mandlekar, and Yuke Zhu. RoboCasa: Large-scale simulation of everyday tasks for generalist robots. In Robotics: Science and Systems , 2024. 11 [33] Junhyuk Oh, Xiaoxiao Guo, Honglak Lee, Richard L. Lewis, and Satinder Singh. Action-conditional video prediction using deep networks in Atari games. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 28, pages 2863–2871, 2015. [34] Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy V. Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mido Assran, Nicolas Ballas, Wojciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra, Michael G. Rabbat, Vasu Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Armand Joulin, and Piotr Bojanowski. DINOv2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. [35] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 4172–4182, 2023. [36] Max Schwarzer, Ankesh Anand, Rishab Goel, R. Devon Hjelm, Aaron Courville, and Philip Bachman. Data-efficient reinforcement learning with self-predictive representations. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [37] Younggyo Seo, Danijar Hafner, Hao Liu, Fangchen Liu, Stephen James, Kimin Lee, and Pieter Abbeel. Masked world models for visual control. In Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Robot Learning , volume 205 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1332–1344. PMLR, 2023. [38] Oriane Siméoni, Huy V. Vo, Maximilian Seitzer, Federico Baldassarre, Maxime Oquab, Cijo Jose, Vasil Khalidov, Marc Szafraniec, Seungeun Yi, Michaël Ramamonjisoa, Francisco Massa, Daniel Haziza, Luca Wehrstedt, Jianyuan Wang, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Leonel Sentana, Claire Roberts, Andrea Vedaldi, Jamie Tolan, John Brandt, Camille Couprie, Julien Mairal, Hervé Jégou, Patrick Labatut, and Piotr Bojanowski. DINOv3. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10104 , 2025. [39] Basile Terver, Tsung-Yen Yang, Jean Ponce, Adrien Bardes, and Yann LeCun. What drives success in physical planning with joint-embedding predictive world models? arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.24497 , 2025. [40] Aäron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748 , 2018. [41] Grady Williams, Nolan Wagener, Brian Goldfain, Paul Drews, James M. Rehg, Byron Boots, and Evangelos A. Theodorou. Information theoretic MPC for model-based reinforcement learning. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , pages 1714–1721, 2017. [42] Weipu Zhang, Gang Wang, Jian Sun, Yetian Yuan, and Gao Huang. STORM: Efficient stochastic transformer-based world models for reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 27147–27166, 2023. [43] Weipu Zhang, Adam Jelley, Trevor McInroe, and Amos Storkey. Objects matter: Object-centric world models improve reinforcement learning in visually complex environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.16443 , 2025. [44] Ruijie Zheng, Xiyao Wang, Yanchao Sun, Shuang Ma, Jieyu Zhao, Huazhe Xu, Hal Daumé III, and Furong Huang. TACO: Temporal latent action-driven contrastive loss for visual reinforce-ment learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 48203–48225, 2023. [45] Ruijie Zheng, Yongyuan Liang, Xiyao Wang, Shuang Ma, Hal Daumé III, Huazhe Xu, John Langford, Praveen Palanisamy, Kalyan Shankar Basu, and Furong Huang. Premier-TACO is a few-shot policy learner: Pretraining multitask representation via temporal action-driven contrastive loss. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning ,volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 61413–61431. PMLR, 2024. [46] Gaoyue Zhou, Hengkai Pan, Yann LeCun, and Lerrel Pinto. DINO-WM: World models on pre-trained visual features enable zero-shot planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04983 , 2024. 12 Appendix 

The supplementary material is organized as follows. Sec. A describes the implementation details of the CAPE architecture and training hyperparameters; Sec. B specifies the baseline configurations, including task-specific adaptations and alignment across baselines. Sec. C elaborates on the evaluation protocols for future state retrieval, DROID [ 26 ] offline action matching, and RoboCasa [ 32 ] zero-shot planning. Sec. D provides additional qualitative visualizations, and Sec. E discusses limitations and future directions. Code, pretrained models, and evaluation environments will be released upon publication. 

# A Implementation Details 

Training procedure. All models are implemented in PyTorch. The observation encoder is ini-tialized from a pre-trained DINOv2 [ 34 ] ViT-S/14 model loaded from the HuggingFace Hub, and its weights are kept frozen throughout all experiments. The visual context encoder takes the output tokens from the frozen DINOv2 [ 34 ] encoder as input and consists of three self-attention layers. The action encoder is a linear layer that projects each raw action vector into a d-dimensional query token, where d = 384 matches the DINOv2 [ 34 ] feature dimension. The parallel action-query decoder consists of six stacked layers, each comprising causal self-attention over action queries and cross-attention between action queries and visual context tokens. CAPE is trained on 4 × NVIDIA L40 GPUs using the AdamW optimizer with a cosine annealing learning rate schedule for 80 epochs on the 8,000-trajectory DROID [ 26 ] subset. Detailed training and architectural hyperparameters are provided in Table 5 and Table 6, respectively. Each training batch contains ngroup = 16 groups, where all samples within a group are drawn from the same episode, ensuring that hard negatives share identical visual background and task context while differing only in their action trajectories. The contrastive temperature τ = 0 .07 is fixed throughout training and not tuned. Table 5: Training hyperparameters. Hyperparameter Value Optimizer AdamW Learning Rate 1 × 10 −4

Weight Decay 1 × 10 −4

LR scheduler CosineAnnealingLR Batch size 2048 Number of epochs 80 Samples per group 16 Contrastive temperature ( τ ) 0.07 Horizon (prediction length) 5Table 6: Architectural Hyperparameters 

Hyperparameter Value 

Vision Encoder DINOv2-ViT-S/14 Action-query Dim 384 Self-Attention Layers 3Cross-Attention Layers 6Attention Heads 8MLP Ratio 4

Empty-action state encoding. CAPE uses the same action-query decoding pathway for both action-conditioned prediction and action-free state encoding. Given a current observation and an action sequence, each action is projected into an action query, which interacts with the visual context tokens through causal self-attention and cross-attention to produce the predicted future state token. When encoding a state without executing any action, we replace the action query with a learnable 13 empty-action query while keeping the rest of the forward computation unchanged. This empty-action query represents the state token of an observation under a zero-action transition. We use this empty-action state encoding for candidate-key encoding in retrieval, goal-state encoding in planning, and zero-horizon training samples where the action sequence length is zero. This design ensures that predicted future state tokens and action-free state tokens are embedded in the same representation space. 

Algorithm 1 Cross-Entropy Method  

> 1:

μ0 ∈ RH×A is zero and covariance matrix σ0I ∈ R(H×A)2

is the identity. Number of optimisa-tion steps J. 

> 2:

for j = 1 to J do  

> 3:

Sample N independent trajectories ({at, . . . , a t+H−1}) ∼ N (μj , (σj )2I) 

> 4:

For each of the N trajectories, unroll predictor to predict the resulting trajectory, ˆzi =

Pθ (ˆ zi−1, a i−1), i = t + 1 , . . . , t + H. Compute cost Lpα(ot, a t:t+H−1, o g ) for each candidate trajectory.  

> 5:

Select top K action sequences with the lowest cost, denote them ({at, . . . , a t+H−1})1,...,K .Update 

μj+1 = 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

({at, . . . , a t+H−1})k

σj+1 =

vuut 1

K − 1

> K

X

> k=1

[( {at, . . . , a t+H−1})k − μj+1 ]2 

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

Step the first m actions of μJ . where m ≤ H is a planning hyperparameter in the environment. If we are in MPC mode, the process then repeats at the next time step with the new context observation. 

Planning procedure. At test time, CAPE is deployed within a CEM-based MPC loop. Algorithm 1 provides the detailed CEM planning procedure. Given an initial observation and a goal image, the planner samples N candidate action sequences at each iteration and performs J optimization iterations. For each candidate trajectory, CAPE predicts the final state token ˆut+H conditioned on the initial observation and the sampled action sequence. The planning cost is computed as the cosine distance between ˆut+H and the goal state token ug . The goal state token ug is obtained from the goal image using the empty-action state encoding described above. 

Visual Decoder. To qualitatively interpret the learned future predictive representations, we fine-tune a visual decoder to reconstruct future observations from predicted latent tokens. Specifically, we initialize the decoder with the weights of the ViT-S decoder with depth 12 released by JEPA-WM [ 39 ]. Different from the original design, which reconstructs images directly from DINO features, our decoder takes the DINO feature of the current observation as input and is additionally conditioned on the predicted future state token produced by CAPE’s action-query mechanism. The predicted future state token is injected into the decoder through adaptive layer normalization (AdaLN [ 35 ]), allowing the reconstruction process to be modulated by the action-induced latent transition. The decoder is fine-tuned to synthesize the corresponding future frame and is trained with a combination of pixel-space ℓ2 loss and perceptual loss. We emphasize that the decoder is used solely for visualization and does not affect either the training or inference of CAPE. This setup allows us to analyze the information captured by the action-query tokens in the form of reconstructed future observations. 

# B Baseline Configurations 

To ensure a rigorous and fair evaluation, we align both the training protocols and parameter capacities across all evaluated latent world models. Table 7 summarizes the parameter distributions of CAPE and the selected baselines, grouped according to their underlying architectural paradigms. We select these baselines because each of them contains an explicit or implicit world-modeling component, making 14 Table 7: Model Comparison: Parameter Counts                             

> Model Category Method Visual Encoder (M) Dynamics Model (M) Total (M)
> Generative / Discrete IRIS 12.5M 19.2M 31.7M DreamerV3 17M 20.74M 37.74M Temporal Contrastive Premier-TACO 23.5M 2.38M 25.88M Latent Predictive DINO-WM 21M (Frozen) 19.3M 40.3M JEPA-WM 300M (Frozen) 228.84M 528.84M V-JEPA-2-AC 1000M(Frozen) 305.21M 1305.21M Ours CAPE 21M (Frozen) 21.3M 42.3M

them suitable for evaluating the quality of learned future representations and the computational efficiency of action-conditioned future prediction. 

Latent Predictive Baselines. As discussed in the main text, CAPE shares a closely related latent predictive paradigm with DINO-WM [ 46 ], JEPA-WM [ 39 ], and V-JEPA-2-AC [ 4], where future dynamics are modeled in a learned visual representation space rather than directly in pixel space. For these baselines, we follow the evaluation protocols of JEPA-WM [ 39 ] and use the corresponding official open-source checkpoints pre-trained on DROID [ 26 ]. Specifically, DINO-WM [ 46 ], JEPA-WM [ 39 ], and V-JEPA-2-AC [ 4] employ frozen DINOv2-S (21M), DINOv3-L (300M), and V-JEPA2 (1000M) vision encoders, respectively. 

Generative and Temporal Contrastive Baselines (Alignment Strategy). Unlike the latent predictive baselines, IRIS [ 31 ], DreamerV3 [ 23 ], and Premier-TACO [ 45 ] were originally developed primarily in reinforcement learning settings, where model learning is typically coupled with task-specific information such as rewards, policies, or online interaction. To isolate and evaluate their world-modeling capability in our setting, we adapt only their world-model components and train them entirely offline on DROID [ 26 ], without using reward labels, task-specific success signals, or online environment interaction. This adaptation enables a direct comparison of their ability to model action-conditioned visual transitions from real-world robot trajectories. Crucially, to ensure a fair comparison and mitigate the disadvantage of not utilizing massive pre-trained foundation models, we scaled up the parameter capacities of IRIS [ 31 ], DreamerV3 [ 23 ], and Premier-TACO [ 45 ] beyond their default configurations (as reflected in Table 7). Furthermore, to align with the training distribution established by the latent predictive baselines JEPA-WM [ 39 ], we trained these models from scratch using an identical subset of the DROID dataset. This subset comprises exactly 8,000 trajectories, with sequence lengths strictly ranging from 20 to 50 steps. All models trained from scratch use 1–4 NVIDIA L40 GPUs depending on model capacity. This alignment ensures that any performance discrepancies observed in our experiments stem fundamentally from architectural inductive biases (e.g., autoregressive vs. parallel decoding, pixel reconstruction vs. latent contrastive) rather than disparities in model capacity or training data volume. 

# C Experiments Settings 

C.1 Future State Retrieval 

We evaluate the predictive fidelity of learned representations via a future state retrieval task on the held-out DROID [ 26 ] dataset, which was originally recorded at 15 FPS. We apply a temporal stride of 6 to the video sequences, resulting in a physical time interval of 0.4 seconds per predictive step. Given a current observation ot and a sequence of future actions at:t+H−1, each model is required to predict the future state representation ˆzt+H and retrieve the corresponding ground-truth future frame from a candidate pool constructed from the same held-out split. Specifically, the held-out split contains 800 episodes that are not used for training, with each episode consisting of 20–50 temporally strided steps. For each query, the model is asked to identify the correct future state from the same episode and the same camera view. The candidate pool is constructed using all frames from 10 episodes of the same task, yielding approximately 420 competitive candidates under the same environment. We use Hit@K as the quantitative retrieval metric, defined as the 15 percentage of queries for which the ground-truth future state is ranked among the top-K candidates according to the predicted-state similarity. We evaluate three prediction horizons, t + 1 (0 .4s) , t + 3 (1 .2s) , and t + 5 (2 .0s) , and report Hit@1, Hit@5, and Hit@10 at each horizon to assess both short-and long-term dynamics modeling capability. To ensure a fair comparison, we made minimal yet reasonable modifications to each baseline to adapt it to the retrieval task. For CAPE, retrieval queries are decoded from action query conditioned on the visual context token of the current observation, while candidate keys are obtained from candidate frame observations using the learnable empty-action query. Retrieval is then performed by computing the cosine similarity between the predicted compact single-token representation and the encoded candidate frames. For baselines that produce dense spatial token predictions, including DINO-WM [ 46 ], V-JEPA2-AC [ 4], JEPA-WM [ 39 ], and IRIS [ 31 ], we directly use the same distance metric adopted in their respective MPC planning phases. Specifically, we compute the L2 distance between the predicted patch tokens and the candidate patch tokens to rank candidate frames, since both retrieval and MPC planning require measuring the cost between a predicted state and a target state. For baselines that represent the state as a single latent vector, including DreamerV3 [ 23 ] and Premier-TACO [45], we compute the L2 distance between candidate keys and retrieval queries. 

C.2 DROID Offline Evaluation Offline Action Matching To evaluate models without having to step actions in a real robot or a simulator, we compare the actions output by the planner and the groundtruth actions of the trajectory sampled from the dataset to define initial and goal state. Given an initial and goal observation pair sampled from the held-out DROID [ 26 ] dataset, we run the MPC planner and compute the L1 error between the actions outputted by the planner and the ground-truth actions of the corresponding trajectory. We adopt the Action Score metric as defined in JEPA-WM [ 39 ]. The Action Score is defined as a rescaled inverse of this error: 800 × (0 .1 − E ) if E < 0.1 , else 0, where E denotes the mean L1 action error on the first three dimensions corresponding to end-effector position control, which is more relevant for the tasks we consider. We evaluate on 50 held-out episodes sampled from DROID [ 26 ], none of which are used for training, focusing on object interaction and arm navigation scenarios. Following JEPA-WM [ 39 ], actions are defined as deltas in measured robot positions and are not normalized. We plan with CEM at horizon H = 3 , with N = 300 candidate trajectories, 

J = 15 iterations, and a planning context window Wp = 1 .Table 8: Environment-specific hyperparameters for planning . N is the number of trajectories evaluated in parallel, H the planning horizon, m the number of actions to step in the environment, K

the number of top actions in CEM, J the number of iterations of the optimizer, M the number of steps per planning episode. Hyperparameter N H m K J M

DROID 300 1/3/5 1/3/5 10 15 -RoboCasa 300 3/5 1 10 15 60 

MPC Planning Efficiency. We evaluate the planning efficiency of each latent world model by measuring the runtime of a single MPC decision loop. For all models, we adopt a CEM-based MPC planner with an identical hyperparameter configuration, as reported in Tab. 8. To isolate the computational overhead of latent-space planning, image encoding time is excluded from the measurement. The measured runtime therefore covers only the forward prediction of future latent states for sampled action trajectories and the computation of MPC costs between the predicted future states and the goal state. All runtimes are measured on a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU with batch size 2 and averaged over all evaluation queries. 

C.3 RoboCasa Zero-Shot Closed-Loop Planning 

We evaluate zero-shot generalization by directly applying our DROID-trained model to the Robo-Casa [ 32 ] simulation environment without any fine-tuning. We benchmark on two custom pick-and-place subtasks extracted from teleoperated trajectories: Reach (Rc-R) , where success requires the end-effector to reach within 0.2 simulator units ( ≈ 5cm ) of the target object, and Place (Rc-Pl), 16 Figure 5: Future state retrieval visualization for horizon h = 5 (2.0s) . Given the input query frame and action sequence (left), CAPE (Ours) accurately predicts the future action-driven state transition and retrieves the Ground Truth frame and relevant candidates. Baseline models fail to capture the long-term dynamics, retrieving frames close to the starting configuration. where success requires the object to be placed within 0.15 simulator units of the target position. The goal frame is taken as the last frame of a teleoperated trajectory. Each evaluation set consists of 16 teleoperated trajectories in a kitchen scene with varied object categories. For each subtask, we evaluate 16 goal-conditioned trials per evaluation seed and report results averaged over 5 seeds, using the final frame of each teleoperated trajectory as the goal frame. To account for the control frequency mismatch between DROID [ 26 ] (2.5 fps) and RoboCasa [ 32 ] (20 Hz), we apply 8 × action repeat. Planner actions are rescaled to match the RoboCasa [ 32 ] action space: [−1, 1] for end-effector delta position and [−1, 1] for gripper closure. We use the same Franka Panda gripper as in DROID [ 26 ]. We plan with CEM at horizon H = 5 , with N = 300 candidate trajectories, J = 15 iterations, and 

m = 1 action stepped per replanning cycle, for a total of 60 replanning steps per episode. 

# D Additional Results 

D.1 Qualitative Visualization Analysis Results of Long-Horizon Retrieval We visualize the top-4 retrieved future frames for h = 5 (2.0s) of our model in Figure 5. It shows that our model can infer the right future state based on current observation and action. 

Visualization of Model with Counterfactual Action Fig. 6 presents reconstructions conditioned on both actual executed actions and hypothetical hardcoded counterfactual actions. Comparing the “Original Action” predictions with the groundtruth demonstrates that CAPE accurately captures agent’s action in visual observation. Furthermore, to verify the model’s capability for counterfactual prediction, we observe that the model’s behaviors under hardcoded action inputs (Col4) are consistent with the correct action motions. This causal alignment confirms that the state tokens are strictly driven by action signals rather than observational shortcuts. 17 Figure 6: Visualization of action-conditioned predicted future tokens. Visualization of action queries based on initial observation across diverse real-world scenes. The “Original Action” column visualizes future states reconstructed from latent tokens predicted using the actual action sequences executed in the dataset. The “Counterfactual Action” column presents predictions conditioned on hardcoded Cartesian translations along specific axes ( −x, −y, and z). 

Figure 7: Full-depth visualization of action-query attention over visual context. We visualize the cross-attention heatmaps from the action query to the spatial visual context tokens of the input start frame ot across all six cross-attention layers. 

Visualization of action-query attention over visual context Fig. 7 presents full-depth visualiza-tions of the cross-attention maps from the action query to the spatial visual context tokens across 18 all six cross-attention layers in the parallel action-query decoder. Across different scenes and de-coder layers, the action query selectively attends to regions that are most relevant for predicting action-conditioned visual transitions, such as the robot arm, the gripper, and potentially interactable objects. In contrast, static or task-irrelevant background regions are largely suppressed in the attention maps. This behavior indicates that the action-query decoder learns to extract interaction-centric visual evidence from the current observation, supporting compact future state prediction in the learned latent space. 

D.2 Discussion on Alternative Architectural Designs 

To further validate the necessity of our architectural choices, we explored an alternative teacher-student training paradigm based on an Exponential Moving Average (EMA) momentum encoder, replacing the InfoNCE contrastive objective. Such EMA-based frameworks have been highly successful in self-supervised visual representation learning, as exemplified by methods such as BYOL [ 17 ] and DINO [ 34 , 38 ]. However, in our action-conditioned dynamics modeling setting, we empirically found that this design quickly leads to severe representation collapse. We hypothesize that, without the explicit repulsion induced by negative samples in the contrastive objective, the action-conditioned predictor can exploit a trivial shortcut: it learns to ignore the action query and produces a nearly static representation that matches the slowly updated EMA target. This observation highlights the importance of hard negatives for enforcing action-dependent state transitions and preventing the learned future representation from collapsing to action-invariant features. 

# E Limitations 

Limitations of contrastive supervision. Our Goal-Convergent Contrastive Objective learns action-conditioned transitions by aligning future predictions induced by different actions that converge to the same target. While this design is effective for capturing action-conditioned visual transitions, its supervision signal is ultimately defined by the separability of transitions in the learned representation space. When multiple action sequences induce highly similar visual transitions, the contrastive signal may provide limited supervision for resolving fine-grained differences among these actions. Consequently, CAPE can learn robust coarse-grained transition representations while being less sensitive to subtle action variations required for precise manipulation. This limitation may partly explain the performance gap on tasks that require accurate spatial alignment or fine-grained control. Future work could incorporate additional local consistency or geometric regularization to strengthen the model’s sensitivity to small but task-critical action differences. 

Limitations of full action-space modeling. Another limitation arises from the structure of the robot action space. As observed in JEPA-WM [ 39 ], the orientation and gripper dimensions in DROID are substantially harder to model than end-effector translation and can dominate action prediction errors due to noise, discontinuities, and contact-dependent dynamics. CAPE inherits this challenge: although it effectively models action-conditioned visual transitions, accurately predicting and optimizing over gripper and orientation actions remains difficult, especially in contact-rich manipulation scenarios such as grasping. Therefore, following JEPA-WM [ 39 ], our DROID offline Action Score evaluation focuses on the first three end-effector position dimensions. Future work could explore separate optimization procedures for gripper and orientation control to extend CAPE toward more precise contact-rich manipulation. 19