Title: Uncertainty-Aware Motion Planning for Autonomous Driving in Mixed Traffic Environment

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.09958v1

Published Time: Wed, 10 Jun 2026 00:07:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Uncertainty-Aware Motion Planning for Autonomous Driving in Mixed Traffic Environment 

# Ming Cheng 1 , Hao Chen 2 , Ziyi Yang 1 , Ziluowen Luo 1 , Senzhang Wang 11Central South University 

> 2

# City University of Macau chengming@csu.edu.cn, sundaychenhao@gmail.com, 8208240708@csu.edu.cn, lzlwddl@csu.edu.cn, szwang@csu.edu.cn 

# Abstract 

In mixed-traffic environments where autonomous and human-driven vehicles may co-exist, motion planning for autonomous vehicles requires antici-pating the future behaviors of surrounding human drivers. Existing reinforcement learning-based methods generally directly incorporate the pre-dicted human intents into the observation to enable a proactive planning. However, human intent is in-herently uncertain due to the behavioral diversity, perception noise, and partial observability. Treat-ing predicted intends as deterministic states can re-sult in unsafe decisions for autonomous vehicles. To address this problem, we propose Uncertainty-Aware Motion Planning (UAMP) , which incor-porates uncertainty in human intent prediction for AV decision-making. Specifically, UAMP first in-troduces a proximity-aware uncertainty estimator to quantify the interaction-conditioned intent un-certainty and constructs an uncertainty-guided joint intent distribution over surrounding human-driven vehicles. Within this uncertainty set, UAMP further introduces Uncertainty-Calibrated Value Learning (UCVL) to correct value function learning biases arising from directly incorporating uncertain hu-man intent predictions into the observation. Ex-tensive experiments in various mixed-traffic sce-narios show that UAMP significantly improves safety and driving comfort, while maintaining traf-fic efficiency compared with existing approaches. The code is released at https://anonymous.4open. science/r/UAMP-5638. 

# 1 Introduction 

Autonomous driving is being integrated into real-world trans-portation systems [Papadoulis et al. , 2019; Kavas-Torris et al. , 2021; Dinneweth et al. , 2022]. This leads to mixed-traffic environments where autonomous vehicles coexist with human-driven vehicles [Hegyi et al. , 2005; Yang and Jin, 2014]. Since autonomous systems are still being gradually deployed and current rules and technology are not fully ready, mixed-traffic scenarios are expected to remain the dominant operating regime for autonomous driving systems. In such 0

1

Autonomous vehicle  Human -driven vehicle 

(a) Traffic state at time step 𝑡 .

(b) Traffic state at time step 𝑡 +1.   

> A
> B80%
> 20% 95%
> 5%

Figure 1: Illustration of the impact of intent prediction uncertainty on autonomous vehicles decision making in complex mixed-traffic environments. 

environments, autonomous vehicles must interact with sur-rounding human-driven vehicles to navigate safely and effi-ciently. Therefore, decision making in autonomous driving systems must explicitly account for the behaviors of nearby human drivers [Chandra et al. , 2020]. Existing methods for mixed-traffic decision-making can be broadly divided into rule-based approaches and learning-based approaches. Rule-based methods rely on predefined rules or simplified behavior models, such as rule engines and classical lane-changing models [Rios-Torres and Ma-likopoulos, 2016]. However, these methods often require extensive manual design and tuning, and they may gener-alize poorly to diverse interaction patterns in mixed traffic scenarios [Di and Shi, 2021]. Learning-based methods, es-pecially reinforcement learning (RL), have attracted increas-ing research attention because they can learn decision poli-cies from data and interaction experience [Vinitsky et al. ,2018]. A common paradigm in RL-based mixed-traffic de-cision making is to explicitly predict the future behaviors or driving intents of surrounding human-driven vehicles and incorporate these predictions into the agent’s observation representation to inform decision making [Shi et al. , 2025; Guo et al. , 2024]. This paradigm allows the agent to reason 

> arXiv:2606.09958v1 [cs.RO] 8 Jun 2026

about future behaviors beyond instantaneous traffic states, while treating predicted human intents as part of the state. However, human intent prediction is inherently uncertain due to diverse driving behaviors, sensor noise, and percep-tion errors [Huang et al. , 2022]. When intent predictions are treated as deterministic state information and embedded into value learning, the value function bootstraps on potentially incorrect future assumptions. As illustrated in Figure 1, at time step t, autonomous vehicle A plans its maneuver based on a prediction that human-driven vehicle B will maintain its current lane and incorporates this prediction into state repre-sentation as well as value estimation. However, at time step 

t + 1 , human-driven vehicle B unexpectedly changes lanes, deviating from the earlier prediction of autonomous vehicles A. Because autonomous vehicles A makes decisions based on the predicted intent of the human-driven vehicle B, it fails to respond instantly to the unexpected behavior of human-driven vehicle B, leading to a collision as shown in Figure 1. Therefore, it is critically important to incorporate the un-certainty in human intent prediction into RL–based decision making for safer autonomous driving, but it faces the fol-lowing two key challenges. 1. Interaction-Conditioned Intent Uncertainty. In mixed-traffic environments, uncer-tainty arises from the behaviors of individual human-driven vehicles. However, autonomous vehicles decision-making requires modeling the uncertainty at the environment level based on interactions. Existing approaches lack an effec-tive way to quantify such interaction-based uncertainty. 2. Uncertainty-Induced Value Bias. Prediction errors in hu-man intent can accumulate in value learning, leading to bi-ased long-horizon estimations and overly aggressive policies. How to correct these value biases during reinforcement learn-ing under intent uncertainty remains a challenging and under-explored research problem. To address these challenges, we propose Uncertainty-Aware Motion Planning (UAMP), a framework for au-tonomous driving in mixed-traffic environments that incor-porates predicted uncertainty in human driving intent into de-cision making. Specifically, UAMP first constructs an ego-centric interaction graph and predicts the intents of surround-ing human-driven vehicles. Based on the predicted intents, we develop proximity-aware uncertainty estimator to a quan-tifies the uncertainty of each surrounding vehicle and aggre-gate it through interactions into an environment-level uncer-tainty radius. Furthermore, we constructs an uncertainty-guided joint intent distribution to capture the collective be-havioral ambiguity of multiple interacting vehicles. Us-ing this joint intent distribution, UAMP applies Uncertainty-Calibrated Value Learning (UCVL) to adjust value estimates within the uncertainty radius, enabling more conservative decision-making under high uncertainty. In summary, our contributions are as follows: • We propose Uncertainty-Aware Motion Planning (UAMP), the first framework to explicitly incorporate predicted human intent uncertainty into RL–based motion planning for autonomous driving. • We define proximity-aware intent uncertainty in traf-fic scenarios and introduce Uncertainty-Calibrated Value Learning (UCVL), which uses this uncertainty to correct value estimates and enable a safer decision making. • We validate the effectiveness of our approach through extensive multi-lane mixed-traffic experiments, show-ing that UAMP significantly improves driving safety and comfort while maintaining traffic efficiency by compar-ison with baseline methods . 

# 2 Preliminaries 

We formulate the decision-making process of autonomous vehicles in mixed-traffic environments as a decentralized par-tially observable Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP), denoted by M = ⟨I , S, A, P, O, R, γ ⟩, where I =

{1, . . . , i } denotes the set of autonomous vehicle agents, S

represents the set of all possible environment states, A is the set of joint actions, P is the transition probability function, 

O denotes the set of possible observations for each agent, R

is the reward function assigning feedback to states and ac-tions, and γ ∈ [0 , 1) is the discount factor. At each time step, autonomous vehicle agents select actions based on their own local observations. 

Observation. At each time step t, each autonomous vehicle agent i receives a local observation oit ∈ O that provides an ego-centric representation of the surrounding traffic environ-ment. The observation comprises the state of the ego vehicle and the states of vehicles within a fixed perception radius. The ego vehicle state includes its current speed, longitudi-nal acceleration, lane index, and local traffic density. For sur-rounding vehicles, the autonomous vehicle observes vehicles located within a fixed perception range. For each neighbor-ing vehicle, the observation contains relative position, relative speed, relative acceleration, and lane index. 

Action Space. Based on its observation, each autonomous vehicle selects an action ait ∈ A . from a discrete action space. The action space consists of five motion primitives: maintain-ing the current speed, accelerating, decelerating, changing lane to the left, and changing lane to the right .

Reward Function. At each time step t, each autonomous vehicle agent receives an environment reward rt ∈ R that encodes multiple driving objectives. The reward is formu-lated as a weighted combination of terms reflecting efficiency, safety, and ride comfort. Specifically, the reward encour-ages efficient travel, penalizes collisions with large negative values, and discourages uncomfortable maneuvers through penalties on excessive acceleration and jerk. The overall goal of all agents is to maximize the expected cumulative dis-counted reward, defined as follows: 

J = E

" TX

> t=0

γt X

> i∈I

rit

#

. (1) 

# 3 Methodology 

Figure 2 illustrates the proposed UAMP framework. First, the proximity-aware uncertainty estimation module takes obser-vations from the traffic environment to predict surrounding human driving intents and quantify interaction-conditioned Environment 

> Autonomous vehicle
> Human -driven vehicle

# …t 1min V(o )[ ]Q  

> Intent
> Representation
> Learning
> 1
> 0
> Time
> Policy

# …

> Value

Uncertainty -Calibrated Value Learning 

> Uncertainty
> Radius
> Action space
> Value

Proximity -aware Uncertainty Estimator tH

Reinforcement  Learning 

# …

Uncertainty -Guided Joint Intent 

Distribution Probability ( ) t i

> 
> Next state distribution
> Value tptotw
> Policy

Figure 2: Overview of the UAMP framework. UAMP estimates proximity-aware uncertainty in human intent prediction from an ego-centric perspective and incorporates this uncertainty into long-horizon decision making through uncertainty-calibrated value learning. 

uncertainty from an ego-centric perspective. Based on the estimated uncertainty, the uncertainty-guided joint intent dis-tribution module samples plausible joint intents within the corresponding uncertainty radius. These sampled joint in-tent distributions are used to calibrate the value function in reinforcement learning, enabling value estimation that ac-counts for intent uncertainty. Next, we introduce the proposed UAMP framework in detail. 

3.1 Proximity-aware Uncertainty Estimator 

Proximity-aware uncertainty modeling aims to capture the uncertainty associated with inferred future intent representa-tions of surrounding human-driven vehicles. This uncertainty is influenced by evolving interaction patterns and partial ob-servability in mixed-traffic scenarios, leading to variations in the confidence of intent prediction over time. Based on these considerations, we design an uncertainty estimator to model intent prediction uncertainty for value learning. 

Intent Representation Learning. At each time step, the local traffic environment faced by the ego agent evolves as surrounding vehicles enter or leave. As shown in Figure 2, we construct an ego-centric interaction graph Gt = ( Vt, E t)

over vehicles within the perception range of the ego agent. Each node v ∈ Vt corresponds to a human-driven vehicle. We focus on human-driven vehicles because their behaviors are unknown and need to be explicitly inferred, whereas other autonomous vehicles follow the same policy as the ego agent and do not require separate intent modeling. Edges in Et en-code local interaction relationships, such as spatial proximity or lane-level relevance. To capture the temporal behavior patterns, we summarize the observation history of each surrounding vehicle into a la-tent state using a recurrent encoder updated online at each time step. For each vehicle v, the latent state is updated as, 

hvt , cvt = Fψ

 uvt , hvt−1, cvt−1

 , (2) where uvt denotes the local observation features at time t and 

hvt aggregates past observations. To incorporate interaction effects, the latent states are fur-ther refined using a graph-based interaction encoder, and in-tent representations are inferred as: 

¯hvt = σ W1hvt + X

> u∈N v

αvu W2hut

!

, (3) 

pvt (A) = πη

 ¯hvt

 , (4) where W1 and W2 are learnable weight matrices, σ(·) de-notes a nonlinear activation function, and αvu denotes nor-malized attention weights over neighbors u ∈ N v , Nv de-notes the set of neighboring vehicles of v in the interaction graph, πη (·) denotes a parametric intent decoder, and pvt (A)

denotes the categorical probability distribution over the dis-crete action space A.

Proximity-Aware Uncertainty. We model intent predic-tion uncertainty as an ego-centric and proximity-aware quan-tity that represents the ambiguity in the future intents of sur-rounding human-driven vehicles at each time step from the perspective of the autonomous agent. For each surrounding human-driven vehicle v, we measure the uncertainty of its inferred intent via entropy as follows: 

Hvt = − X

> a∈A

pvt (a) log pvt (a), (5) where a higher entropy indicates a larger ambiguity in the predicted future behavior of vehicle v.To account for the varying influence of surrounding vehi-cles on the ego agent, we introduce an ego-centric proximity-based weighting mechanism. Let dt(i, v ) denote the Eu-clidean distance between the ego agent i and vehicle v at time 

t. The proximity weight is defined as: 

wt(i, v ) = exp ( −αd t(i, v )) 

P 

> u∈N i

exp ( −αd t(i, u )) , (6) where α > 0 controls the spatial decay rate and Ni denotes the set of vehicles within the ego agent’s vicinity. The overall proximity-aware intent prediction uncertainty for agent i is obtained by aggregating vehicle-level uncertain-ties using the ego-centric proximity weights as follows: 

εit = X

> v∈N i

wt(i, v )Hvt . (7) The resulting uncertainty measure εit characterizes the uncer-tainty in the predicted future intents of surrounding human-driven vehicles that is most relevant to the ego agent, and is subsequently employed as a sampling radius to bound and guide the generation of joint intent distributions for down-stream decision making. 

3.2 Uncertainty-Guided Joint Intent Distribution 

To account for the uncertainty in the behaviors of surround-ing human-driven vehicles, this subsection constructs an uncertainty-guided joint intent distribution. At each time step t, the intent prediction module outputs a probabilistic intent distribution pvt for each human-driven vehicle v within the ego agent perceivable neighborhood Ni.Each distribution captures the predicted driving intent of the corresponding individual vehicle. To reason about the joint influence of surrounding vehi-cles on the ego agent’s decision making, we aggregate the individual intent predictions {pvt }v∈N i and construct an ego-centric joint intent distribution. Specifically, assuming the conditional independence given the current observation, the nominal joint distribution is defined as: 

Pit(ahdv t ) = Y

> v∈N i

pvt (av ), (8) where ahdv t = ( avt )v∈N i denotes the joint intent configuration of surrounding human-driven vehicles in Ni.However, due to partial observability, limited sensing range, and complex multi-agent interactions, the true joint be-haviors of surrounding vehicles cannot be perfectly inferred. As a result, the nominal joint intent distribution P(i) 

> t

is inher-ently uncertain and should not be treated as fully reliable. To explicitly account for this uncertainty, we leverage the proximity-aware intent uncertainty measure εit and define a set of uncertainty-guided joint intent distribution around the prediction Pit. We construct the uncertainty set as follows: 

Uit =



Q 12 Q − Pit 1 ≤ εit



, (9) where Q denotes an alternative joint intent distribution. When intent predictions are confident, the uncertainty set concentrates around the nominal joint distribution; under high uncertainty, a broader set of joint intents must be considered. 

3.3 Uncertainty-Calibrated Reinforcement Learning 

Incorporating predictive intent information into an agent’s observations may bias value estimation under uncertain intent predictions. We therefore propose an uncertainty-calibrated value learning method that adjusts value propagation based on proximity-aware intent uncertainty. 

Uncertainty-Calibrated Value Learning In order to rea-son about the future behaviors of surrounding vehicles, the ego agent augments its physical observation with predicted intent information. Specifically, at time step t, the ego agent receives an augmented state as follows: 

ˆoit = ( oit, {pvt }v∈N i ), (10) where oit denotes the state returned by the environment, and 

pvt represents the predicted intent distribution of each sur-rounding vehicle v. While augmenting observations with in-tent information enables anticipation of future interactions, directly incorporating the predicted intent distribution pvt as part of the state may introduce bias in the value estimation. This is because the predicted intent distribution pvt is uncer-tain, and the true underlying distribution qvt may differ signif-icantly from the prediction. The bias in the value estimation can be expressed as: 

∆V = Epvt

V (ˆ oit) − Eqvt

V (ˆ oit) . (11) where pvt be the predicted intent distribution for vehicle v, and 

qvt be the true intent distribution. By substituting the defini-tion of the augmented observation from Eq. 10 and applying the standard total-variation bound, we obtain (the proof is de-ferred to Appendix A.3): 

∆V ≤ 2 εit(Vmax − Vmin ), (12) where Vmax , V min are the bounds of the value function. This inequality shows that the magnitude of the bias is di-rectly proportional to the uncertainty radius εit. A larger un-certainty radius leading to a larger potential error in value estimation. Based on this observation, we perform value backup over the uncertainty set of joint intent distributions. Accordingly, the uncertainty-calibrated Temporal Difference (TD) target is defined as follows: 

yit = rit + γ min 

> Q∈U it

EQ

V (eoit+1 ) , (13) 

EQ

V (eoit+1 ) = X

> ahuman ∈A

Q  ahdv  V (eoit+1 ), (14) where the next augmented observation eot+1 depends jointly on the ego agent’s action and the future behaviors of sur-rounding vehicles: 

eoit+1 = f  ˆoit, aauto  

> t

, ahdv 

> t

 , (15) where ahdv  

> t

denotes the joint future actions of nearby human-driven vehicles, and f represents the environment transition. In implementation, the minimum expected value over Uit is approximated via sampling-based evaluation of joint actions. This formulation yields a conservative value estimation when intent prediction uncertainty is high, while recovering the standard Bellman backup as εit → 0.

Policy Optimization with Calibrated Values We employ Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) to train the model, with value updates guided by the uncertainty-calibrated TD targets described earlier. The loss function is defined as: 

L(θ, ϕ ) = E

h

min  rt(θ)At, clip (rt(θ),

1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)At

 + ( Vϕ(ˆ ot, i ) − Rt)2 i

,

(16) 

rt(θ) = πθ (at | ˆot)

πθold (at | ˆot) , (17) where Rt is the cumulative return at time t, At is the advan-tage function, defined as: 

At =

> ∞

X

> l=0

(γλ )lδt+l, δt = yit − Vϕ(ˆ oit), (18) where γ ∈ (0 , 1) denotes the discount factor, λ ∈ [0 , 1] con-trols the temporal smoothing of advantage estimation. 

# 4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup 

Simulation Environment. We conduct our experiments in the microscopic traffic simulator SUMO [Lopez et al. , 2018], which provides high-fidelity modeling of vehicle behaviors and interactive traffic dynamics through the TraCI interface. As a widely adopted platform in autonomous driving and traf-fic research, SUMO enables realistic evaluation of motion planning and decision-making algorithms in complex traffic scenarios [Kiran et al. , 2022]. 

Traffic Scenarios. We consider mixed-traffic environments consisting of both autonomous vehicles and human-driven vehicles. We consider three traffic scenarios based on road configurations: 2-Lane , 3-Lane , and 4-Lane roads. To sim-ulate realistic behavioral uncertainty, human-driven vehicles follow heterogeneous driving styles, including aggressive ,

normal , and cautious , with configurable proportions. Detailed configurations of the traffic scenarios setting are provided in Appendix A.1. 

Baselines. We compare the proposed UAMP framework with a set of representative car-following and multi-agent reinforcement learning baselines, covering both ruled-based approaches and learning-based methods. The model-based baseline includes MVCM [Wang et al. , 2021], while the learning-based baselines include IPPO [De Witt et al. , 2020], rMAPPO [Yu et al. , 2022], P-DRL [Shi et al. , 2025], and MAPPO-PIS [Guo et al. , 2024]. Further implementation de-tails of the baseline methods are provided in Appendix A.2. 

Evaluation Metrics. Following prior work [Guo et al. ,2024], we evaluate performance using four metrics that cap-ture efficiency, safety, and ride comfort. 

Episodic Average Speed ( Vavg ). Vavg measures the average driving speed of autonomous vehicles in an episode. 

Average Travel Time ( Ttravel ). Ttravel measures the average number of time steps required for the ego vehicle to complete the task and reach its goal. 

Acceleration Cost ( Jacc ). Jacc quantifies ride comfort by measuring the magnitude of longitudinal acceleration fluctu-ations. It is defined as: 

Jacc = 1

|I| 

X

> i∈I

vuut 1

TiTiX

> t=1

 αit

2, (19) where I denotes the set of autonomous vehicles, αit is the longitudinal acceleration of vehicle i at time step t, and Ti is its active duration. 

Success Rate( Rsuccess ). Rsuccess is the overall proportion of episodes in which the autonomous vehicle completes its task without collision. 

4.2 Main Result Analysis 

The quantitative comparison result under different network configurations are summarized in Table 1. From the table, one can derive the following observations. 

Comparison with Rule-Based Method. MVCM serves as a representative rule-based car-following baseline that relies on deterministic control logic. As shown in Table 1, MVCM achieves high success rates across all network settings, re-flecting its robustness under simplified assumptions. How-ever, this robustness comes at the cost of limited adaptabil-ity. MVCM exhibits lower average speed and noticeably higher acceleration fluctuations compared to UAMP, indi-cating less efficient and less smooth driving behavior. In contrast, UAMP adapts its decisions based on uncertainty-aware value estimation, enabling smoother interactions and improved safety without sacrificing efficiency. 

Comparison with RL-Based Methods. Compared with RL-based methods, UAMP achieves consistent and substan-tial performance improvements across multiple metrics by explicitly modeling interactions with human-driven vehicles and their future driving intents. In the 2-Lane scenario, where all methods achieve a success rate of 1.0, UAMP reduces the average travel time by 34 .8% compared to rMAPPO. Simi-larly, in the 3-Lane configuration, UAMP shortens travel time by 36 .0% relative to rMAPPO while maintaining the same success rate, indicating that RL-based methods take substan-tially longer to reach the destination under comparable in-teraction scenarios. In terms of ride comfort, UAMP also demonstrates consistent improvements, reducing acceleration jerk by 41 .2% compared to IPPO in the 2-Lane scenario and by 34 .7% in the 4-Lane scenario, which indicates smoother driving behavior. These improvements do not come at the cost of efficiency, as UAMP maintains comparable or higher average speed across all configurations. Table 1: Performance comparison of different methods under varying traffic scenarios. 

Method 2-Lane Configuration 3-Lane Configuration 4-Lane Configuration 

Vavg ↑ Ttravel ↓ Jacc ↓ Rsuccess ↑ Vavg ↑ Ttravel ↓ Jacc ↓ Rsuccess ↑ Vavg ↑ Ttravel ↓ Jacc ↓ Rsuccess ↑

MVCM 13.236 38.400 0.551 1.000 14.739 34.700 0.368 1.000 20.529 25.500 0.617 1.000 rMAPPO 7.993 58.900 0.299 0.850 15.135 49.400 0.658 0.910 21.443 24.400 0.855 1.000 IPPO 14.514 41.200 0.243 1.000 13.373 45.400 0.306 0.960 22.579 23.500 0.869 1.000 P-DRL 11.894 53.333 0.516 0.940 14.505 38.200 0.273 0.980 18.955 24.200 0.832 0.980 MAPPO-PIS 11.840 62.500 0.422 0.910 12.301 55.200 0.209 0.960 20.623 27.800 0.632 1.000 

Ours 15.242 38.400 0.143 1.000 17.472 31.600 0.203 1.000 20.286 21.300 0.567 1.000 

Comparison with Deterministic Prediction-Based RL Methods. Prediction-informed RL baselines such as P-DRL and MAPPO-PIS incorporate human driving predictions into decision making but treat these predictions as determin-istic, ignoring their inherent uncertainty. Consequently, pre-diction errors may misguide the learned policy, leading to re-duced success rates and degraded ride comfort. Across differ-ent traffic configurations, UAMP consistently achieves higher success rates than both P-DRL and MAPPO-PIS. In the 2-Lane scenario, UAMP improves the success rate by 6.4% 

over P-DRL and by 9.9% over MAPPO-PIS, while in more complex settings UAMP maintains a 2.0% higher success rate than P-DRL in both the 3-Lane and 4-Lane configurations. In terms of ride comfort, UAMP yields substantial improve-ments, reducing acceleration jerk by 72 .3% in the 2-Lane scenario and by 31 .9% in the 4-lane scenario compared to P-DRL, and consistently achieving lower jerk than MAPPO-PIS across all configurations. Importantly, these improve-ments in success rate and ride comfort are obtained with-out sacrificing efficiency, as UAMP maintains comparable or higher average speed across all configurations. Overall, the results demonstrate that UAMP effectively balances efficiency, safety, and comfort across varying levels of traffic complexity. 

4.3 Ablation Study 

To investigate the contribution of each key component in UAMP, we conduct an ablation study with the following vari-ants: (i) w/o Intent Prediction : removes the intent predic-tion module and relies solely on instantaneous observations of surrounding vehicles. (ii) w/o UCVL : removes UCVL and applies standard temporal-difference learning. The results consistently show that introducing intent pre-diction leads to higher driving speeds and shorter arrival times across all scenarios, indicating that access to future intention information enables more anticipation and efficient decision making, as illustrated in Figure 3. However, when predic-tion uncertainty is ignored, this efficiency gain is accompa-nied by a decrease in the proportion of successfully arrived vehicles and a noticeable degradation in driving comfort, sug-gesting that agents rely on potentially inaccurate predictions and adopt overly aggressive behaviors. In contrast, when pre-diction uncertainty is explicitly considered, the model is able 2-lane 3-lane 4-lane         

> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> Vavg
> Average Speed
> 2-lane 3-lane 4-lane
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> Ttravel
> Average Travel Time
> 2-lane 3-lane 4-lane
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Jacc
> Acceleration Cost
> 2-lane 3-lane 4-lane
> 0.80
> 0.85
> 0.90
> 0.95
> 1.00
> 1.05
> Rsuccess
> Success Rate
> w/o Intent prediction w/o UCVL UAMP

Figure 3: Ablation study results between UAMP with its two vari-ants across three experimental scenarios.. 

to largely preserve the efficiency benefits brought by intention prediction while significantly reducing collision rates and im-proving driving comfort. This demonstrates that uncertainty-aware decision making helps balance efficiency and safety. 

4.4 Performance under Different Scenario Settings 

To further evaluate the robustness of UAMP under uncer-tainty conditions, we compare UAMP with both rMAPPO and MVCM across multiple mixed-traffic scenarios. 

Impact of Traffic Density. As traffic density increases, ve-hicle interactions become more frequent and human driv-ing behaviors exhibit higher uncertainty. As shown in Ta-ble 2, UAMP consistently outperforms rMAPPO and MVCM across low, medium, and high density scenarios. In high-density traffic, UAMP improves efficiency and comfort rel-ative to rMAPPO, reducing travel time by about 10 .9% and lowering acceleration cost by about 23 .6% , indicating safer and smoother behavior under congestion. These results Table 2: Comparison of performance metrics under varying traffic density levels in the 3-Lane scenario.                                 

> Density Ttravel Jacc
> MVCM rMAPPO Ours MVCM rMAPPO Ours Low 18.220 15.80 15.500 0.668 0.982 0.099
> Medium 14.827 14.70 14.000 0.885 0.787 0.454
> High 22.300 21.88 19.500 0.897 0.522 0.399 510 20
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> Ttravel
> 510 20
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Jacc
> MVCM rMAPPO Ours
> Figure 4: Comparison of performance metrics under varying au-tonomous vehicle penetration in the 3-Lane scenario.

suggest that explicitly modeling intent uncertainty enables UAMP to remain stable as interaction complexity increases. 

Impact of Autonomous Vehicles Penetration. As shown in Figure 4, we further examine robustness under varying autonomous vehicles penetration levels. When autonomous vehicles penetration is low, each autonomous vehicle inter-acts with more human-driven vehicles, resulting in higher behavioral uncertainty. Under this setting, UAMP achieves shorter travel time and lower acceleration cost than rMAPPO, demonstrating stronger robustness. As autonomous vehicles penetration increases, the gap in travel time becomes smaller; however, UAMP consistently maintains lower acceleration variance, indicating more stable control behavior. 

Impact of Human Driving Style Distribution. Finally, we evaluate performance under different human driving style dis-tributions. As shown in Table 3 As human driving behaviors become more aggressive and unpredictable, interaction un-certainty increases. In aggressive traffic, although UAMP ex-hibits a longer travel time, it achieves a substantially lower acceleration cost, resulting in smoother and more stable driv-ing behavior under highly uncertain interactions. Overall, across all scenarios, UAMP exhibits superior ro-bustness in terms of safety and ride comfort, confirming the effectiveness of incorporating uncertainty in motion planning. 

# 5 Related Work 

Mixed traffic systems consisting of autonomous vehicles and human-driven vehicles present significant challenges due to the diversity and uncertainty of human driving behavior [Xue 

et al. , 2023; Chen et al. , 2021; Jin et al. , 2021]. Early re-search relied on classical parametric traffic and vehicle in-                         

> Table 3: Comparison of performance metrics under varying human driving styles in the 3-Lane scenario.
> Styles Ttravel Jacc
> MVCM rMAPPO Ours MVCM rMAPPO Ours Cautious 14.611 12.90 11.400 0.901 0.819 0.164
> Medium 14.827 14.70 14.000 0.885 0.787 0.454
> Aggressive 19.500 18.200 20.900 1.042 0.762 0.174

teraction models to describe vehicle dynamics and behav-ior [Ghosh and Parisini, 2022]. Models such as IDM, OVM, and FVDM characterize traffic evolution using predefined re-lationships among speed, spacing, and relative motion [Nishi-nari, 2014], offering analytical tractability [Li et al. , 2023]. While these models are computationally efficient and inter-pretable, they typically assume fixed parameters and deter-ministic responses, which limits their ability to reflect the variability and uncertainty of human driving behavior in mixed traffic conditions [Guo and Jia, 2020]. To address these limitations, learning-based methods have been increasingly introduced to capture complex driving pat-terns. Various data-driven techniques, including neural net-works, hidden Markov models, and probabilistic regression approaches, have demonstrated improved accuracy in mod-eling human behavior compared with traditional paramet-ric models [Di and Shi, 2021; Morton et al. , 2016; Qu et al. , 2017; Lefevre et al. , 2014]. More recently, reinforce-ment learning has been applied to enable autonomous vehi-cles to adapt their decision-making strategies based on ob-served traffic interactions, without explicitly specifying hu-man driver models [Huang et al. , 2020; Chen et al. , 2023; Wang et al. , 2024; Peng et al. , 2025]. These methods im-prove responsiveness in mixed traffic systems, yet they com-monly rely on predictions of human-driven vehicle behavior for downstream decision-making. Despite their advancements, both traditional and learning-based approaches share a common limitation: predicted be-haviors of human-driven vehicles are typically treated as de-terministic inputs in planning, while the associated uncer-tainty is rarely quantified. This omission poses challenges for safety-critical decision-making in complex and dynamic traffic environments. 

# 6 Conclusion 

Motion planning in mixed-traffic environments relies on ac-curate predictions of human driving behaviors. However, existing reinforcement learning–based methods often treat predicted intents as deterministic inputs, overlooking the inherent uncertainty in human decision making. To ad-dress this issue, we propose Uncertainty-Aware Motion Plan-ning (UAMP), which incorporates proximity-aware intent uncertainty into autonomous decision making. Through Uncertainty-Calibrated Value Learning (UCVL), UAMP en-ables more cautious and stable control policies. Extensive ex-periments demonstrate that UAMP improves safety and ride comfort while maintaining competitive traffic efficiency. References 

[Chandra et al. , 2020] Rohan Chandra, Tianrui Guan, Sru-jan Panuganti, Trisha Mittal, Uttaran Bhattacharya, Aniket Bera, and Dinesh Manocha. Forecasting trajectory and be-havior of road-agents using spectral clustering in graph-lstms. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 5(3):4882– 4890, 2020. [Chen et al. , 2021] Chaoyi Chen, Jiawei Wang, Qing Xu, Jianqiang Wang, and Keqiang Li. Mixed platoon con-trol of automated and human-driven vehicles at a signal-ized intersection: Dynamical analysis and optimal control. 

Transportation research part C: emerging technologies ,127:103138, 2021. [Chen et al. , 2023] Dong Chen, Mohammad R Hajidavalloo, Zhaojian Li, Kaian Chen, Yongqiang Wang, Longsheng Jiang, and Yue Wang. Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning for highway on-ramp merging in mixed traffic. 

IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems ,24(11):11623–11638, 2023. [De Witt et al. , 2020] Christian Schroeder De Witt, Tarun Gupta, Denys Makoviichuk, Viktor Makoviychuk, Philip HS Torr, Mingfei Sun, and Shimon Whiteson. Is independent learning all you need in the starcraft multi-agent challenge? arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09533 ,2020. [Di and Shi, 2021] Xuan Di and Rongye Shi. A survey on autonomous vehicle control in the era of mixed-autonomy: From physics-based to ai-guided driving policy learning. 

Transportation research part C: emerging technologies ,125:103008, 2021. [Dinneweth et al. , 2022] Joris Dinneweth, Abderrahmane Boubezoul, Ren´ e Mandiau, and St´ ephane Espi´ e. Multi-agent reinforcement learning for autonomous vehicles: A survey. Autonomous Intelligent Systems , 2(1):27, 2022. [Ghosh and Parisini, 2022] Arnob Ghosh and Thomas Parisini. Traffic control in a mixed autonomy scenario at urban intersections: An optimal control approach. 

IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems ,23(10):17325–17341, 2022. [Guo and Jia, 2020] Longxiang Guo and Yunyi Jia. Inverse model predictive control (impc) based modeling and pre-diction of human-driven vehicles in mixed traffic. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles , 6(3):501–512, 2020. [Guo et al. , 2024] Yicheng Guo, Jiaqi Liu, Rongjie Yu, Peng Hang, and Jian Sun. Mappo-pis: A multi-agent proximal policy optimization method with prior intent sharing for cavs’ cooperative decision-making. In European Confer-ence on Computer Vision , pages 244–263. Springer, 2024. [Hegyi et al. , 2005] Andreas Hegyi, Bart De Schutter, and Hans Hellendoorn. Model predictive control for optimal coordination of ramp metering and variable speed limits. 

Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies ,13(3):185–209, 2005. [Huang et al. , 2020] Mengzhe Huang, Zhong-Ping Jiang, and Kaan Ozbay. Learning-based adaptive optimal con-trol for connected vehicles in mixed traffic: Robustness to driver reaction time. IEEE transactions on cybernetics ,52(6):5267–5277, 2020. [Huang et al. , 2022] Yanjun Huang, Jiatong Du, Ziru Yang, Zewei Zhou, Lin Zhang, and Hong Chen. A survey on trajectory-prediction methods for autonomous driving. 

IEEE transactions on intelligent vehicles , 7(3):652–674, 2022. [Jin et al. , 2021] Li Jin, Mladen ˇ Ciˇ ci´ c, Karl H. Johansson, and Saurabh Amin. Analysis and design of vehicle pla-tooning operations on mixed-traffic highways. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 66(10):4715–4730, 2021. [Kavas-Torris et al. , 2021] Ozgenur Kavas-Torris, Sukru Yaren Gelbal, Mustafa Ridvan Cantas, Bilin Aksun Guvenc, and Levent Guvenc. Connected uav and cav coordination for improved road network safety and mobility. Technical report, SAE Technical Paper, 2021. [Kiran et al. , 2022] B Ravi Kiran, Ibrahim Sobh, Victor Tal-paert, Patrick Mannion, Ahmad A. Al Sallab, Senthil Yo-gamani, and Patrick P´ erez. Deep reinforcement learning for autonomous driving: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , 23(6):4909–4926, 2022. [Lefevre et al. , 2014] St´ ephanie Lefevre, Yiqi Gao, Dizan Vasquez, H Eric Tseng, Ruzena Bajcsy, and Francesco Borrelli. Lane keeping assistance with learning-based driver model and model predictive control. In 12th Inter-national Symposium on Advanced Vehicle Control , 2014. [Li et al. , 2023] Jinjue Li, Chunhui Yu, Zilin Shen, Zicheng Su, and Wanjing Ma. A survey on urban traffic control un-der mixed traffic environment with connected automated vehicles. Transportation research part C: emerging tech-nologies , 154:104258, 2023. [Lopez et al. , 2018] Pablo Alvarez Lopez, Michael Behrisch, Laura Bieker-Walz, Jakob Erdmann, Yun-Pang Fl¨ otter¨ od, Robert Hilbrich, Leonhard L¨ ucken, Johannes Rummel, Peter Wagner, and Evamarie Wießner. Microscopic traffic simulation using sumo. In IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference , pages 2575–2582, 2018. [Morton et al. , 2016] Jeremy Morton, Tim A Wheeler, and Mykel J Kochenderfer. Analysis of recurrent neural networks for probabilistic modeling of driver behavior. 

IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems ,18(5):1289–1298, 2016. [Nishinari, 2014] Katsuhiro Nishinari. Traffic flow dy-namics: Data, models and simulation. Physics Today ,67(3):54–54, 2014. [Papadoulis et al. , 2019] Alkis Papadoulis, Mohammed Quddus, and Marianna Imprialou. Evaluating the safety impact of connected and autonomous vehicles on mo-torways. Accident Analysis & Prevention , 124:12–22, 2019. [Peng et al. , 2025] Rui Peng, Min Yang, Rui Tao, Mingye Zhang, and Renjie Zhang. Hierarchical control strategy for cooperative on-ramp merging of connected and auto-mated vehicles on multi-lane highways. IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 2025. [Qu et al. , 2017] Ting Qu, Shuyou Yu, Zhuqing Shi, and Hong Chen. Modeling driver’s car-following behavior based on hidden markov model and model predictive con-trol: A cyber-physical system approach. In 11th Asian Control Conference (ASCC) , pages 114–119. IEEE, 2017. [Rios-Torres and Malikopoulos, 2016] Jackeline Rios-Torres and Andreas A Malikopoulos. A survey on the coordination of connected and automated vehicles at intersections and merging at highway on-ramps. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems ,18(5):1066–1077, 2016. [Shi et al. , 2025] Haotian Shi, Kunsong Shi, Keshu Wu, Wan Li, Yang Zhou, and Bin Ran. A predictive deep reinforce-ment learning based connected automated vehicle antici-patory longitudinal control in a mixed traffic lane change condition. IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 2025. [Vinitsky et al. , 2018] Eugene Vinitsky, Aboudy Kreidieh, Luc Le Flem, Nishant Kheterpal, Kathy Jang, Cathy Wu, Fangyu Wu, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, and Alexandre M Bayen. Benchmarks for reinforcement learning in mixed-autonomy traffic. In Conference on robot learning , pages 399–409. PMLR, 2018. [Wang et al. , 2021] Shuyi Wang, Bin Yu, and Miyi Wu. Mvcm car-following model for connected vehicles and simulation-based traffic analysis in mixed traffic flow. 

IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems ,23(6):5267–5274, 2021. [Wang et al. , 2024] Qun Wang, Fei Ju, Huaiyu Wang, Yahui Qian, Meixin Zhu, Weichao Zhuang, and Liangmo Wang. Multiagent reinforcement learning for ecological car-following control in mixed traffic. IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification , 10(4):8671–8684, 2024. [Xue et al. , 2023] Yongjie Xue, Xiaokai Zhang, Zhiyong Cui, Bin Yu, and Kun Gao. A platoon-based coopera-tive optimal control for connected autonomous vehicles at highway on-ramps under heavy traffic. Transportation re-search part C: emerging technologies , 150:104083, 2023. [Yang and Jin, 2014] Hao Yang and Wen-Long Jin. A con-trol theoretic formulation of green driving strategies based on inter-vehicle communications. Transportation Re-search Part C: Emerging Technologies , 41:48–60, 2014. [Yu et al. , 2022] Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Ji-axuan Gao, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu. The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative multi-agent games. Advances in neural information processing sys-tems , 35:24611–24624, 2022. A Appendix 

A.1 Different Traffic Scenarios 

Mixed-Traffic Scenario Design in SUMO To evaluate the performance of UAMP under diverse mixed-traffic condi-tions, we design a set of controlled traffic scenarios in SUMO. The scenarios are constructed by varying three key factors: 

traffic density , autonomous vehicles penetration level , and 

human driving behavior distribution .

Human Driving Behavior Parameterization Human-driven vehicles are modeled using the IDM car-following model in SUMO. To capture behavioral variability, we con-sider three representative driving styles, namely aggressive, normal, and cautious, by varying the stochasticity and safety-related parameters of IDM. Each driving style is character-ized by a distinct combination of the imperfection parameter 

σ and the minimum gap minGap . 

> Table 4: Parameterization of human driving behavior styles in SUMO.

Driving Style σ minGap (m) Aggressive 0.8 1.6 Normal 0.5 2.0 Cautious 0.25 2.6 Each human-driven vehicle is assigned a driving style by sampling from a predefined categorical distribution. By varying the proportions of aggressive, normal, and cautious drivers, we construct traffic flows with different behavior compositions. Specifically, the balanced setting uses a mixed distribution of 20% aggressive, 60% normal, and 20% cau-tious drivers. In the aggressive-dominant scenario, the pro-portions are set to 60% aggressive, 30% normal, and 10% cautious, while in the cautious-dominant scenario, 10% of drivers are aggressive, 30% are normal, and 60% are cautious. 

Traffic Density and autonomous vehicles Penetration Set-tings Traffic density is controlled by the total vehicle gen-eration rate. We consider three density levels: 800, 1200, and 1600 vehicles per hour, corresponding to low-, medium-, and high-density traffic conditions. Higher traffic density leads to more frequent interactions among vehicles and increased uncertainty in human driving behaviors. Instead of specifying autonomous vehicles penetration as a percentage, we fix the absolute number of autonomous vehi-cles in the traffic flow to better control interaction complex-ity. Specifically, we evaluate scenarios with 5, 10, and 20 au-tonomous vehicles, while the total traffic demand is kept con-stant. The remaining vehicles are human-driven vehicles gen-erated according to the specified driving style distributions. 

A.2 Baseline Details 

To comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of the pro-posed UAMP framework, we compare it against a diverse set of baseline methods, including both traditional model-based car-following strategies and modern multi-agent rein-forcement learning (MARL) approaches. 

Ruled-Based Control Strategy. 

• MVCM [Wang et al. , 2021]: A V2X-based car-following model that incorporates the optimal velocities of multiple preceding vehicles with memory mechanisms. By lever-aging information from several leading vehicles, MVCM improves traffic flow stability and enhances disturbance at-tenuation in mixed traffic environments. 

Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Approaches. 

• IPPO [De Witt et al. , 2020]: A fully decentralized MARL method that assigns an independent PPO agent to each au-tonomous vehicle. Although all agents share the same net-work architecture, they are trained using only local obser-vations and rewards, without explicit coordination during training. • rMAPPO [Yu et al. , 2022]: A centralized-training decentralized-execution (CTDE) extension of IPPO that incorporates global traffic information during training through a centralized value function. This design enables agents to learn more coordinated behaviors while maintain-ing decentralized execution. • P-DRL [Shi et al. , 2025]: A hybrid approach that inte-grates physics-informed behavior prediction models with deep reinforcement learning. By embedding prior knowl-edge of vehicle dynamics and traffic behaviors into the learning process, P-DRL improves control robustness in mixed-traffic scenarios. • MAPPO-PIS [Guo et al. , 2024]: An intent-sharing MARL framework built upon MAPPO, where agents explicitly ex-change high-level driving intentions. This mechanism en-hances cooperative decision-making, safety, and overall traffic efficiency among connected and autonomous vehi-cles. All baseline methods rely on deterministic intent predic-tions and do not explicitly model uncertainty. To ensure fair-ness, identical observation and action spaces, as well as con-sistent training and evaluation settings, are used across all methods. 

A.3 Proof of Value Bias 

To formally justify that directly incorporating uncertain intent predictions into the augmented observation can introduce bias in value estimation, we provide a detailed derivation of the value bias bound. Consider a surrounding vehicle v with predicted intent dis-tribution pvt and the corresponding true but unknown intent distribution qvt . When the ego agent constructs the augmented observation 

ˆoit = ( oit, {pvt }v∈N i ),

the value function is evaluated based on the predicted distri-bution rather than the true distribution. This mismatch in-duces an estimation bias. The prediction-induced value bias is defined as 

∆V = Epvt [V (ˆ oit)] − Eqvt [V (ˆ oit)] . (20) Expanding the expectations gives 

∆V = X

> a

pvt (a)V (ˆ oit(a)) − X

> a

qvt (a)V (ˆ oit(a)) . (21) Rearranging the terms, we obtain 

∆V = X

> a

 pvt (a) − qvt (a)V (ˆ oit(a)) . (22) Applying H¨ older inequality yields 

∆V ≤ X

> a

|pvt (a) − qvt (a)| · V (ˆ oit(a)) . (23) Since the value function is bounded such that 

Vmin ≤ V (·) ≤ Vmax , (24) it follows that 

|V (ˆ oit(a)) | ≤ Vmax − Vmin . (25) Therefore, we have 

∆V ≤ (Vmax − Vmin ) X

> a

|pvt (a) − qvt (a)| . (26) The summation term corresponds to the ℓ1 distance be-tween the predicted and true intent distributions: 

∥pvt − qvt ∥1 = X

> a

|pvt (a) − qvt (a)|. (27) By the definition of total variation distance, 

T V (pvt , q vt ) = 12 ∥pvt − qvt ∥1. (28) In our method, the uncertainty radius εit is defined such that 

T V (pvt , q vt ) ≤ εit. (29) Consequently, 

∥pvt − qvt ∥1 ≤ 2εit. (30) Substituting this result into Eq. (26), we obtain the final bound 

∆V ≤ 2 εit(Vmax − Vmin ). (31) This inequality shows that the value estimation bias grows linearly with the uncertainty radius εit. Therefore, directly using uncertain predicted intents in the augmented observa-tion can lead to potentially significant value bias, particularly when the prediction uncertainty is large. This result moti-vates the need for uncertainty-calibrated value propagation in the main method. 

A.4 Model Details 

To summarize the overall learning and decision-making pro-cedure, Algorithm 1 presents the complete training pipeline of UAMP, including proximity-aware uncertainty estimation and uncertainty-calibrated value learning. 

Algorithm 1 UAMP: Uncertainty-Aware Motion Planning 

1: Input: policy parameters θ, value parameters ϕ; intent encoder parameters ψ, ζ, η ; discount factor γ, GAE pa-rameter λ

2: Output: trained policy πθ

3: for each episode do 

4: Initialize rollout buffer D ← ∅ 

5: for each timestep t do 

6: Observe physical state ot

7: for each surrounding human-driven vehicle v do 

8: hvt ← F ψ (uvt , hvt−1)

9: end for 

10: Construct interaction graph Gt = ( Vt, E t)

11: for each v ∈ Vt do 

12: ¯hvt ← G ζ

 hvt , {hut }u∈N (v)



13: pvt ← πη (¯hvt )

14: Hvt ← − P 

> a

pvt (a) log pvt (a)

15: end for 

16: Compute ego-centric uncertainty: 

17: εt ← P 

> v∈N i

wt(i, v ) Hvt

18: Form augmented observation ˆot = ( ot, {pvt }v∈N )

19: Sample action at ∼ πθ (· | ˆot)

20: Execute at, observe reward rt and next observation 

ˆot+1 

21: Store (ˆ ot, a t, r t, ε t) in D

22: end for 

23: for each timestep t in D do 

24: Compute uncertainty-calibrated TD target: 

25: yt = rt + γ min Q∈U t EQ [V (eot+1 )] 

26: end for 

27: Update θ, ϕ using PPO with targets {yt}

28: end for