Title: Unifying Object-Centric World Models and Diffusion Policy: A Hierarchical Framework for Multi-Stage Robotic Tasks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.08775v1

Published Time: Tue, 09 Jun 2026 02:19:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Unifying Object-Centric World Models and Diffusion Policy: A Hierarchical Framework for Multi-Stage Robotic Tasks 

Raktim Gautam Goswami 1 rgg9769@nyu.edu 

Prashanth Krishnamurthy 1 pk929@nyu.edu 

Yann LeCun 2,3 yann@cs.nyu.edu 

Farshad Khorrami 1 fk462@nyu.edu  

> 1

Tandon School of Engineering, New York University  

> 2

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University  

> 3

AMI Labs 

# Abstract 

Visual world models have shown great potential in learning complex system dynamics. Re-cent advancements leverage these models as transition functions within Model Predictive Control (MPC) frameworks to solve various control tasks. When applied to robotics, how-ever, they are limited to single-stage tasks such as reaching or grasping, and struggle with multi-stage ones that demand complex sequential planning. In this work, we introduce WorldDP, a world model framework designed for multi-stage robotic manipulation. Our hierarchical approach utilizes a high-level world model as a transition function to optimize for feasible subgoals during runtime, which are subsequently reached by a low-level Diffu-sion Policy. To further aid in learning dynamics and planning, we incorporate object-centric representations that decouple environmental entities and enable us to plan sequentially with respect to each. Evaluated across several robotics benchmarks, WorldDP consistently out-performs existing baselines, validating that coupling the world model’s physically grounded planning with diffusion policy’s efficient execution yields superior multi-stage performance. 

# 1 Introduction 

World models, in recent times, have emerged as a powerful class of functions for learning complex system dynamics from observations (Hou et al., 2026). Since images are the most prevalent data source, visual world models (Hafner et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2024; Bar et al., 2025; Goswami et al., 2025) have become the standard for capturing these dynamics. Following prior literature (Zhou et al., 2024; Goswami et al., 2025), we define “dynamics” as how the agent moves in response to actions, how the environment reacts, and how both appear from the camera’s viewpoint. While early approaches treated raw pixels as system states, more recent methods often adopt the Joint Embedding Predictive Architecture (JEPA) (Assran et al., 2025) paradigm, representing states as latent embeddings of image encoders (Zhou et al., 2024). World models, when applied to control tasks, typically follow one of three primary methodologies: integrating them into Reinforcement Learning (RL) pipelines (Hafner et al., 2025; Hansen et al., 2024), directly predicting joint action-state sequences (Cen et al., 2025), or embedding them within an optimal control framework (Sobal et al., 2026). In the latter approach, the world model works as a transition function inside a Model Predictive Control (MPC) loop to plan trajectories by optimizing action sequences. Our work focuses on this third category. A key advantage over end-to-end methods like Diffusion Policy (Chi et al., 2025) or Vision-Language-Action models (Kim et al., 2024; Physical Intelligence et al., 2025; Bjorck et al., 2025) is that world models can be trained on reward-free, suboptimal trajectories and generalize to new task configurations without any fine-tuning. 1

> arXiv:2606.08775v1 [cs.RO] 7 Jun 2026

Figure 1: Overview of WorldDP, a hierarchical framework for multi-stage robotic manipulation. 

(a) At test-time, we use our object-centric world model within a particle filter to optimize latent action se-quences, employing a structured, object-based loss to find optimal subgoals. (b) A low-level, goal-conditioned diffusion policy (DP) then sequentially tracks and executes these subgoals to solve the task. While existing world models have shown promising results on synthetic tasks like PushT (Zhou et al., 2024; Maes et al., 2026a), such environments typically feature small observation spaces or discrete action sets. When applied to large-scale robotic tasks with continuous action spaces, existing methods generally succeed only on short-horizon or single-step objectives, such as reaching or grasping (Goswami et al., 2025; Maes et al., 2026b; Terver et al., 2025; Assran et al., 2025) and fail on long-horizon manipulation tasks that require multi-stage, sequential control. The vast majority of robotic tasks are, in fact, multi-staged; for instance, even a simple “pick up a book” task requires a sequence of reaching, grasping, and lifting. In this paper, we begin by analyzing why current world models struggle with multi-stage tasks and use these insights to motivate our approach. Most existing methods (Zhou et al., 2024; Assran et al., 2025; Terver et al., 2025) utilize patch-level features from large-scale encoders like DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023) or V-JEPA (Assran et al., 2025) to represent the system’s state space. While effective for computer vision tasks like segmentation, these patch-level features are suboptimal for state representation for dynamics learning as they often omit critical fine-grained details. Inspired by Haramati et al. (2026), we adopt an object-centric representation for our world model states. This approach facilitates better attention to relevant entities, such as the agent and environmental items, during model learning and enables individual planning for each item during MPC. Unlike Haramati et al. (2026), we learn these representations on top of DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023) patch features, using a SAM2 (Ravi et al., 2025) model to provide guidance during training. Existing world-model-based planners often rely on a single-tier hierarchy: given a goal image, these meth-ods (Maes et al., 2026b; Zhou et al., 2024) optimize the entire action sequence directly. Despite using environmental feedback at each MPC step, this flat planning remains inherently difficult for multi-stage tasks. While recent work (Zhang et al., 2026) explored hierarchical latent world models by optimizing for intermediate “subgoals”, the lower level requires direct physical action optimization, which can be sensitive to subgoal selection, especially for robotic tasks. In our framework, we also utilize a hierarchical structure to optimize for subgoals, but instead of using another world model at the lower level, we use a diffusion policy (Chi et al., 2025). This diffusion policy provides several advantages: it is robust for the short-horizon 2control needed to reach subgoals, executes much faster than costly world-model planning, and can compen-sate for suboptimal subgoals to a good extent. Intuitively, our world model decomposes multi-stage tasks into reachable subgoals for the diffusion policy. Further, the object-centric representation enables individual, recursive planning for each object. Another failure mode for current models is the generation of imprecise subgoals. For tasks like “pick and place,” or “open drawer,” subgoals should ideally represent pivotal frames, such as the moment a handle is gripped. To encourage the generation of such critical states, we train a contact predictor that signals when the robot interacts with an object, incorporating this signal into our MPC cost function. Finally, while most world-model-based planning relies on optimization techniques like the Cross-Entropy Method (CEM), we find that multi-modal optimization via a Particle Filter is superior, as robotic tasks are inherently multi-modal (i.e., multiple distinct, equally valid action sequences can achieve the same goal). We evaluate our approach on several multi-stage tasks from the OGBench (Park et al., 2025) benchmark, demonstrating that it outperforms existing world models, diffusion policies, and diffusion-based subgoal generation baselines. In summary, our contributions are: 

• We introduce WorldDP (Fig. 1), a novel hierarchical framework that integrates object-centric world models with diffusion policies to solve complex, multi-stage robotic tasks. 

• We present an object-centric state representation for latent world models that leverages DINOv2 patch-level features guided by SAM2-generated segmentation masks during training. 

• We present the first world model approach to employ object-aware planning, incorporating a contact predictor and particle filter optimization to enhance subgoal generation. 

• We provide extensive evaluations across multi-stage benchmarks, demonstrating that WorldDP out-performs existing state-of-the-art methods. 

# 2 Related Works 

World Models for Robot Learning. The concept of world models has a long history in control the-ory (Bryson & Ho, 1969). It also has roots in biological systems, where animals are believed to maintain internal models of their environment (Wolpert et al., 1995; 1998; Miall & Wolpert, 1996). Recently, learning-based methods have brought world models to the forefront by enabling the learning of complex system dynamics from data (LeCun, 2022; Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018). In robotics, comprehensively reviewed in the survey by Hou et al. (2026), world models generally follow one of three paradigms: acting as simulators to train reinforcement learning policies (e.g., Hafner et al. (2025); Hansen et al. (2024)), directly predict-ing joint action-state sequences (e.g., Cen et al. (2025); Ye et al. (2026)), or generating future states for high-level planning (e.g., Assran et al. (2025); Zhou et al. (2024)). Our work aligns with the third category, focusing on learning from reward-free, unannotated trajectories of observation-action pairs. Specifically, we build upon the Joint Embedding Predictive Architecture (JEPA) framework (Assran et al., 2023; Bardes et al., 2024; Assran et al., 2025), where world models operate over latent embeddings rather than raw pixels. Dino-WM (Zhou et al., 2024), a pioneer work in JEPA-style world models, trained a predictor over frozen vision embeddings (Oquab et al., 2023) and optimizing actions online via MPC and the Cross-Entropy Method. While subsequent works have extended this approach to navigation (Bar et al., 2025), dexterous manipulation (Goswami et al., 2025), and whole-body control (Bai et al., 2026), or focused on representation learning (Maes et al., 2026b) and parallel planning (Psenka et al., 2026), most remain limited to single-stage tasks like grasping or reaching. In contrast, WorldDP extends these capabilities by integrating object-centric world model planing with diffusion policies, enabling sequential, multi-stage robotic manipulation. 

Hierarchical Task Execution. A natural approach to solving multi-stage tasks is through hierarchical execution, where upper-level hierarchies predict subgoals at different levels of abstraction, while lower-level components track and execute them. This paradigm is widely used in hierarchical optimal control (Falcone et al., 2008; Li et al., 2021; Fang et al., 2019) and reinforcement learning (RL) (Chen et al., 2024; Choi et al., 2026). For instance, HECRL (Haramati et al., 2026) combines diffusion-based subgoal generation with 3low-level RL tracking, utilizing object-centric representations to improve execution. However, hierarchical planning within latent world models remains largely unexplored. While V-JEPA2 (Assran et al., 2025) relies on manually defined subgoals for pick-and-place tasks, HWM (Zhang et al., 2026) is the first latent world model to optimize latent actions against a patch-level cost function for two-level hierarchical planning, using upper-level for subgoal generation and the lower-level world model to find physical actions to reach the subgoals. In contrast, WorldDP’s hierarchical framework optimizes using a object-centric cost function and tracks the resulting subgoals using a diffusion policy. This strategy provides faster, more robust execution, enabling longer multi-stage sequences such as multi-object pick-and-place tasks. 

Object-Centric Learning. Existing latent world models typically rely on patch-level representations (e.g., Zhou et al. (2024)), which can omit crucial fine-grained details due to the creation of patches. In contrast, object-centric (also known as entity-centric) approaches learn distinct embeddings for individual objects in the environment. These methods generally fall into two categories: particle-based (Daniel & Tamar, 2022; Qi et al., 2025) and slot-attention-based (Wu et al., 2022; Collu et al., 2024). Particle-based methods decompose an image into a set of particles defined by their spatial locations and local features. Recent world models and RL frameworks like Daniel et al. (2026); Haramati et al. (2026) have adopted this method. Inspired by Singh et al. (2025); Mosbach et al. (2024), we instead build upon the slot-attention framework to extract object-centric representations directly from frozen DINOv2 Oquab et al. (2023) patch features. To enhance feature grounding, we guide the slot-attention training with an auxiliary loss derived from segmentation masks generated using the SAM2 (Ravi et al., 2025) model. 

# 3 Methodology 

Problem Formulation. Let Ik ∈ RH×W ×3 (H: height, W : width) denote the RGB observation of an environment at timestep k, captured by a static external camera. The environment contains an articulated robot (e.g., a UR5e arm) and various interactable objects depending on the specific task. Given a current observation I0 and a target goal Ig , our objective is to find a sequence of actions {a0, a 1, . . . } to reach the state depicted in Ig . The action space ak ∈ R5 consists of commanded changes to the end-effector’s 

(x, y, z ) coordinates, yaw, and gripper opening. For training, a “play” dataset of image-action trajectories 

(I0, a 0, I 1, a 1, . . . ) consisting of robot-environment interactions is available. The dataset lacks explicit reward signals or goal labels, and may contain suboptimal trajectories, including failed manipulation attempts. Our work focuses on multi-stage tasks (e.g., rearrangement of three cubes) which often necessitates high-level planning and sequential manipulation of the various environment entities. 

Method Overview. The input image Ik is processed by a frozen DINOv2 (Oquab et al., 2023) encoder to extract patch-level features, which our Object-Centric Encoder (Sec. 3.1) then aggregates into discrete vector embeddings for each environment entity. These latent embeddings are fed into a Conditional Diffusion Transformer dynamics prediction model (Bar et al., 2025) to predict the subsequent entity states at a future timestep (Sec. 3.2). During task execution, a hierarchical approach is used where the world model serves as a learned transition dynamics function within an MPC framework to identify optimal intermediate subgoals (Sec. 3.3), which are realized via a goal-conditioned Diffusion Policy (Sec. 3.4). The values of all the hyperparameters used for each of the datasets are in the appendix. 

3.1 Object-Centric Encoder (OCE) 

The image Ik is processed by a frozen DINOv2 encoder to generate patch-level features zk ∈ RP ×d, where P

denotes the number of patches and d the feature dimensionality. Following the slot attention framework (Lo-catello et al., 2020), we initialize N slots ¯sk ∈ RN ×d, representing environment entities such as the robot, objects, and background. These slots are refined by a Slot Corrector through recursive passes of cross-attention and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) blocks; here, queries and values for attention are derived from 

zk, while keys are derived from ¯sk using linear layers. The resulting object-centric representation sk ∈ RN ×d

serves as the state representation for our world model. To train the Slot Corrector, a Slot Decoder is used, which takes sk as input and predicts per-slot reconstruc-tions ˆznk ∈ RP ×d and masks ˆmk ∈ RN ×P , where n ∈ { 1, . . . , N }. Each patch in ˆmk represents a probability 4Figure 2: Object-Centric Encoder Training with SAM2 Guidance. The DINOv2-encoded image patches zk and initialized slots ¯sk are refined by a Slot Corrector into latent slots sk. A Slot Decoder then maps these slots to predicted masks ˆmk and per-slot reconstructions, which are aggregated to reconstruct 

ˆzk. The model is trained using dual objectives: a reconstruction loss (between zk and ˆzk) and a mask segmentation loss against SAM2-generated ground truth mk.distribution over the N entities for that patch. The reconstructed patch-level embedding is calculated as 

ˆzk = ∑Nn=1 ˆmnk · ˆznk , with the reconstruction loss defined as: 

Ll2_oce = ∥zk − ˆzk∥22. (1) Our approach differs from works like Haramati et al. (2026) because we learn the object-centric representation on top of the DINOv2 patch features rather than raw pixels. While this leverages the pre-trained capabilities of DINOv2 and accelerates training, small objects (e.g., cubes) occupying few pixels may be under-represented in Eq. 1. We address this by providing privileged guidance during training via SAM2 (Ravi et al., 2025). Images are segmented into entities (robot, background, and specific objects) to generate ground-truth masks. These masks are downsampled to the patch resolution to produce mk; a patch is assigned to an object if it covers more than 15% of the patch area. We then employ a Tversky loss (Salehi et al., 2017), Ltv , (described in the appendix) to supervise the predicted masks ˆmk. The total loss for the object-centric encoder is: 

Loce = Ll2_oce + λoce Ltv (mk, ˆmk) (2) where λoce = 1 . Fig. 2 illustrates this complete training pipeline. 

3.2 Conditional Diffusion Transformer Dynamics Prediction Model 

Figure 3: WorldDP’s dynamics model. Given the object-centric states sk1 and an action sequence at timestep k1, we next define our dynamics model fθ . 1 We adopt the Conditional Diffusion Transformer (CDiT) architecture used in Goswami et al. (2025). However, unlike Goswami et al. (2025), which operates on patch-level states of shape (P, d ), our dynam-ics model takes states sk ∈ RN ×d as input to explicitly process the object-centric representation (Fig. 3). The action sequence 

ak1→k2 = {ak1 , a k1+1 . . . , a k2−1} (where k1 < k 2) is compressed into a latent action embedding ak1 ∈ R32 via a transformer-based action encoder (Zhang et al., 2026). This embedding conditions the CDiT model through Adaptive Layer Normalization layers. Our CDiT network features a depth of 12 layers with 4 attention heads per layer.         

> 1We use the notation {k1, k 2, . . . }exclusively during training to indicate variable time steps. Elsewhere (e.g., during planning) the notation {k, k + 1 , . . . }is used for simplicity, as the time steps spacing does not affect the underlying logic.

5The object-centric encoder is fully trained beforehand and remains frozen during dynamics model training. For each sample of training, we consider a data horizon of 100 frames, from which we randomly sample 5

frames at timesteps k1 < k 2 < k 3 < k 4 < k 5. While constant frameskips can also be used, utilizing random temporal skips during training has been shown to improve dynamics model robustness (Bai et al., 2026). During training, we predict the next state ˆski+1 conditioned on all previous ground-truth states {ski , . . . , s k1 }

via teacher forcing, minimized by a mean squared error (MSE) loss. For inference and planning, the model operates autoregressively: the predicted state ˆski and the subsequent action chunk aki→ki+1 are iteratively fed back into fθ to generate ˆski+1 , continuing this to roll out future states. 

3.3 Task Execution 

With the dynamics model trained, we formulate our task execution within a hierarchical two-tier MPC framework. The upper tier utilizes the world model to plan for high-level subgoals from a target goal image, while the lower tier employs a goal-conditioned Diffusion Policy to realize these subgoals (Sec. 3.4). 

Sampling-Based Optimization via Particle Filtering. Starting from the initial state s0, planning involves executing multi-step autoregressive rollouts using fθ over a horizon of T world-model steps. The final predicted state ˆsT is evaluated against the goal state sg (derived from image Ig ) via a cost function to optimize the latent action sequence. While prior works (Zhou et al., 2024; Bar et al., 2025) utilize the CEM, we find that a Particle Filter (PF) better accommodates the inherent multi-modality of robotic action spaces, where multiple distinct, equally valid action sequences can achieve the same goal. Unlike the CEM in existing works, which often uses a single Gaussian distribution, a PF maintains a diverse set of hypotheses (particles) to better capture these varied solutions. To initialize the PF, we generate spatial trajectories of length T from the end-effector to keypoints, sampled to cover the workspace. These positional deltas are concatenated with randomly initialized yaw and gripper commands, and passed through the action encoder to yield latent seed action sequences. These seeds serve as the initial particles (means) of our filter. We sample Q total action sequences ¯a{q} = {a{q} 

> 0

, . . . , a{q} 

> T−1

} (q ∈ { 1, . . . , Q }) around these seed means using a standard deviation σ. Autoregressive rollouts through fθ generate predicted state trajectories s{q} =

{s{q} 

> 1

, . . . , s {q} 

> T

}. A cost function C(ˆ s{q} 

> T

, s g ) evaluates each sequence; the top M candidates are selected as the refined means for the next iteration. This optimization repeats for L iterations, and the highest-ranking sequence at the final step defines the optimal subgoal sequence {ˆs{o} 

> 1

, . . . , ˆs{o} 

> T

}. All the parameters used for the PF for each of the tasks are detailed in the Appendix. 

Object-Centric Cost Function. As the objective involves manipulating physical objects, our cost function operates directly on the object embeddings. Excluding the agent and background, we isolate the N −2 objects embeddings from the predicted state ˆs{q} 

> T

and denote that as ˆo{q} 

> T

∈ R(N −2) ×d. The first component of our cost is the mean squared error (MSE) relative to the target object goal states og :

Cdist = 1(N − 2) ∗ d ∥og − ˆo{q} 

> T

∥22. (3) To encourage subgoals to capture critical manipulation phases, such as grasping objects, we incorporate a contact-prediction cost. We train a lightweight MLP contact predictor that maps state sk to an (N − 2) -dimensional vector of contact probabilities. Passing the full rollout s{q} yields a contact trajectory c{q} ∈

RN −2. Given a target object to manipulate, we define a one-hot reference vector cref and penalize deviations using a cross-entropy loss Cce (c{q}, cref ). The final optimization cost is formulated as: 

C(ˆ s{q} 

> T

, s g ) = Cdist + λplan · C ce (c{q}, cref ) (4) where λplan balances the two objectives. For tasks where only one object changes state between the initial and target configurations (e.g., Scene-Single-Direct in Sec. 4.1), we identify the target using our object-centric encoder. We isolate the object with the largest embedding delta between the start and goal frames, then restrict cost function optimization to that specific object. 6Algorithm 1: Pseudo-code of WorldDP’s hierarchical planning. Given the current observation and target goal, a particle filter optimizes latent action sequences through the world model to generate optimal subgoals. These subgoals are tracked and executed via the low-level diffusion policy.                                                                                                                  

> def WorldDPPlanning(obs, goal, action_means, **kwargs): """ obs: environment observation goal: goal image action_means: initialized means for the particle filter kwargs: contains planning parameters like total_iter, lambda_plan """
> #1. World Model Subgoal Planning via Particle Filtering
> for iter_idx in range(total_iters):
> #A. Generate action particles around the current means
> action_particles =sample_around_mean(action_means, sigma, total_samples)
> #B. Evaluate particles through autoregressive rollouts
> total_costs =[]
> for action in action_particles: pred_states, object_cost, contact_cost =get_costs(obs, action, goal) total_costs.append(object_cost +lambda_plan*contact_cost)
> #C. Select top −Mcandidates as means for next iteration
> top_M_idx =top_M_indices(total_costs, top_M) action_means =[action_particles[i] for iin top_M_idx]
> #2, Extract optimal subgoal sequence from highest −ranking particle
> optimal_subgoals, _, _=get_costs(obs, action_means[0], goal)
> #3. Goal −Conditioned Diffusion Policy to reach subgoals
> curr_obs =env.get_info()
> for subgoal in optimal_subgoals: low_level_actions =diff_policy(curr_obs, subgoal) curr_obs, is_success =env.step(low_level_actions)
> return is_success

Hierarchical Execution. The optimal subgoals {ˆs{o} 

> 1

, . . . , ˆs{o} 

> T

} are tracked sequentially by the low-level Diffusion Policy. A pseudo-code of the planning algorithm is in Alg. 1. For multi-stage tasks requiring sequential manipulation (e.g., Cube-Triple task in Sec. 4.1), we plan and execute all subgoals for one object, capture a new observation, and re-plan for the another object, and so on, maintaining an MPC loop. 

3.4 Goal-Conditioned Diffusion Policy 

We adapt the transformer-based Diffusion Policy (DP) from Chi et al. (2025) by substituting raw DINOv2 inputs with our object-centric representations flattened to a vector of shape N ×d . The model is conditioned on a context vector comprising the flattened current and goal states, along with robot end-effector position and velocity, to generate 40-step action sequences. To enhance temporal generalization, we use a randomized goal-sampling strategy that dynamically selects target frames within a 40-frame window, with ground-truth actions zero-padded to length 40. During evaluation, these predicted actions operate within the end-effector’s operational space and are executed on the manipulator via an inverse kinematics controller. Furthermore, to ensure precise grasping in pick-and-place tasks, we follow Chang & Gupta (2023) and utilize an end-effector-mounted depth camera to dynamically correct residual pose errors. 7Figure 4: Example Start and Goal images from each of the robotic tasks are shown. 

# 4 Experiments 

Our experiments address the following key questions: (a) How does WorldDP perform in multi-stage robotics tasks compared to existing methods? (b) How does unifying the world model’s planning with a diffusion policy in WorldDP impact performance? (c) What is the impact of the object-centric representation? (d) Which framework components are crucial to its success? 

4.1 Implementation Details 

Robotic Tasks and Datasets. We evaluate our method on manipulation tasks from the OGBench (Park et al., 2025) benchmark, utilizing the environment variants introduced by Maes et al. (2026a). These variants differ from the original benchmark in camera viewpoint and end-effector color. The tasks (Fig. 4) are: (a) Cube-Single: A table-top environment featuring a UR5e robotic arm and a single red cube. The robot must manipulate the cube from the initial to a target locations specified by a goal image. (b) Cube-Triple: An expansion of Cube-Single featuring three distinct cubes (red, blue, and yellow). The agent must sequentially rearrange the cubes from their initial positions to match a randomly sampled goal configuration. (c) Scene-Single-Direct: This task is based on the Scene-Single environment which includes the UR5e arm, a drawer, a sliding window, a cube, and two push buttons that control the locks for the drawer and window. The goal image differs from the initial state by exactly one object modification (e.g., a single button press or a repositioned window or drawer). (d) Scene-Single-Composite: Utilizing the same environment layout as Scene-Single-Direct, to achieve the goal state, the agent must first interact with the appropriate button to unlock the drawer or window before executing the target manipulation. Each environment introduces distinct long-horizon and control challenges. While Cube-Single is our baseline task, it still requires precise dynamics and robust control. Scene-Single-Direct demands that agents infer tasks from goal images and plan accordingly, while drawers and windows introduce geometric constraints 8requiring exact manipulation. Scene-Single-Composite elevates this complexity by enforcing causal depen-dencies, such as a prerequisite button press; it requires high precision in interacting with diverse mechanisms while managing the compounding errors inherent in sequential subtasks. Finally, Cube-Triple represents the highest spatial complexity, demanding precise sequential planning and highly accurate multi-object manip-ulation to prevent compounding errors across the three targets. Collectively, these benchmarks rigorously evaluate the frameworks in sequential, multi-stage, and vision-guided control settings. 

Training Settings. Following the data collection procedure in Maes et al. (2026a), we compile a “play” dataset of 2 million frames for each environment configuration (Cube-Single, Cube-Triple, and Scene-Single). Note that we use the model trained on Scene-Single dataset to evaluate both of Single-Single-Direct and Scene-Single-Composite. These datasets consist of randomized agent interactions with environmental entities and contain no reward signals or goal annotations. We train separate, environment-specific Object-Centric Encoders, Dynamics Models, Diffusion Policy, and Contact Predictors using these trajectories with images resized to 224 × 224 resolution. During dynamics model training, each training instance pairs a frame with 4 context frames randomly sampled from the preceding 100-frame window. Utilizing a batch size of 128 yields approximately 15,500 optimization steps per epoch ( ≈ 2 × 10 6/128 ). Given the large dataset size, we train each model for a total of 5 epochs. All models are optimized on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU cluster node. Comprehensive training schedules and hyperparameter listings are detailed in the Appendix. 

Baselines. We evaluate WorldDP against several established baselines, detailed below: 

• DINO-WM (Zhou et al., 2024): A vision-based JEPA world model framework that utilizes frozen DINOv2 patch features as its state representation. 

• LeWM (Maes et al., 2026b): A JEPA world model that jointly optimizes its image encoder and latent dynamics model. Its highly compact state space enables accelerated planning times. 

• HECRL ∗: An adaptation of the HECRL framework (Haramati et al., 2026). The original ar-chitecture uses a diffusion model to predict subgoals, which are tracked by a goal-conditioned RL agent. For a fair comparison, our modified HECRL ∗ replaces the low-level RL controller with our goal-conditioned diffusion policy, uses single-view image inputs instead of multi-view streams, and receives the same budget of environmental feedback during inference as our method. 

• Goal-Conditioned Diffusion Policy (Chi et al., 2025): A standard imitation learning baseline for robotic manipulation, structurally identical to the low-level policy tracker in WorldDP. We evaluate two horizons: DP40 , trained to execute trajectories of 40 steps, and DP100 , optimized for trajectories of 100 steps. All baselines are trained on the same trajectories as WorldDP, utilizing the hyperparameter configurations specified in their respective original works wherever applicable. 

Evaluation Settings. We evaluate all frameworks on distinct, held-out test datasets across 50 trajectories per task; the same set of test trajectories is evaluated across all baselines to ensure a fair comparison. Task success is evaluated via ground-truth environment states. For Cube-Single and Cube-Triple, success is determined by the Euclidean distance between the current and target coordinates of the cube(s). For Scene-Single-Direct and Scene-Single-Composite, success is measured by the states of the drawer, sliding window, and push buttons. Comprehensive criteria for success detection are detailed in the Appendix. 

4.2 Quantitative Results 

Multi-Stage Manipulation Tasks. The evaluations on the harder tasks (Cube-Triple and Scene-Single-Composite) are presented in Table 1. For Cube-Triple, we decompose performance into the success rates of placing at least one, at least two, and all three cubes. For Scene-Single-Composite, we evaluate both the initial button-pressing success and the overall task completion rate. WorldDP consistently outperforms all baselines, with it achieving more than double the success rate of the next best method at 3 cubes manipulation in the Cube-Triple environment. 9Table 1: Success rate (%) comparison on Cube-Triple and Scene-Single-Composite. 1-Cube, 2-Cubes, and 3-Cubes in Cube-Triple refer to at least 1, 2, and all 3 cube successes. 

Methods Cube-Triple Scene-Single-Composite 

1-Cube 2-Cubes 3-Cubes Button Press Full Task DinoWM (Zhou et al., 2024) 62 10 0 8 0LeWM (Maes et al., 2026b) 74 8 0 4 0HECRL ∗ (Haramati et al., 2026) 78 34 12 60 18 DP40 (Chi et al., 2025) 42 12 0 64 0DP100 (Chi et al., 2025) 90 32 4 78 14 

WorldDP (Ours) 100 72 30 60 20 

Table 2: Success rate (%) comparison on Cube-Single and Scene-Single-Direct tasks. 

Methods Cube-Single Scene-Single-Direct Both Task 

Button Drawer Window Average Average 

DinoWM (Zhou et al., 2024) 0 25 23.53 5.88 18 9LeWM Maes et al. (2026b) 0 12.5 11.76 23.53 16 8HECRL ∗ (Haramati et al., 2026) 98 31.25 52.94 5.88 30 63 DP40 (Chi et al., 2025) 0 87.5 35.29 11.76 44 32 DP100 (Chi et al., 2025) 98 50 23.53 5.88 26 63 

WorldDP (Ours) 72 81.25 76.47 64.71 74 74.5 

We observe a similar trend in the simpler Cube-Single and Scene-Single-Direct environments (Table 2). Because each Scene-Single-Direct episode modifies exactly one environmental entity (a button, the drawer, or the window), we break down its success rates by these respective interaction categories. WorldDP achieves the highest overall performance on these tasks. While DP100 excels on Cube-Single due to the simplicity of pick-and-place, HECRL ∗ (which uses DP100 to track subgoals) also performs well. Nevertheless, we outperform all baselines on Scene-Single-Direct on average. LeWM and DinoWM, lacking multi-stage execution capabilities, struggle across all tasks. Their marginal success on Cube-Triple’s 1-cube and 2-cube metrics is primarily because some cubes initialize near their target goals and do not need to be moved. 

Unifying World Model with Diffusion Policy. To isolate the impact of integrating world model planning with our diffusion policy, we compared our framework against two baselines: “w/o DP,” which directly optimizes raw environment actions, and “DP Only,” the standalone Diffusion Policy (DP40). Our complete hierarchical framework outperforms both ablated configurations across nearly all tasks, particularly those requiring even basic multi-stage planning like drawer and window manipulation. The method using DP only performs marginally better only on the simple button-pressing task. Additionally, we evaluate the effect of the policy horizon on our method by replacing our default 40-step diffu-sion policy with a 100-step variant (DP100). This configuration yields slightly lower performance, achieving an average success rate of 58% on Scene-Single-Direct and 8% on Scene-Single-Composite, compared to 74% 

and 20% with our proposed method, respectively. Because our upper-tier world model generates closely spaced, precise subgoals, the shorter 40-step policy horizon provides more effective local action execution. 

Impact of Object-Centric Encoding. To study the impact of object-centric encoding, we evaluate a variant trained on Scene-Single using raw DINOv2 patch-level embeddings as states (following Zhou et al. (2024); Goswami et al. (2025)), denoted as “w/o OCE” in Fig. 5. Our full framework consistently outperforms this baseline, which only matches performance on the Window task within Scene-Single-Direct. Additionally, Table 3 compares our method against a variant that optimizes using image embeddings rather than object embeddings. While both approaches yield identical success rates on Scene-Single-Composite, likely because the underlying world model still processes object-centric representations, optimizing via image embeddings significantly degrades performance on the more challenging Cube-Triple task. 10 Figure 5: Ablation Studies: Removing either the low-level Diffusion Policy (w/o DP) or the Object-Centric Encoder (w/o OCE) degrades success rates compared to our full WorldDP framework. Table 3: Ablation study showing that optimiz-ing during task execution using image embedding cost function degrades performance compared to WorldDP’s optimization w.r.t. object embeddings. 

Optim. Scene-Single Cube-Triple Methods Composite 1-Cube 2-Cubes 3-Cubes Image Emb. 20 82 32 6

WorldDP 20 100 72 30 

Figure 7: Task Execution Example. Given the initial and target states, our framework decomposes the task into sequential planning phases. Step 1 optimizes subgoals (1A, 1B) for the buttons which are executed by the Diffusion Policy (DP) (represented by orange arrows). Step 2 takes the new obvervation as input and optimizes subgoals (2A, 2B) for the drawer and window, subsequently executed by the DP. 

Figure 6: Ablations on use of Particle Fil-ter (PF) and Contact Predictor (CP). 

Which components are crucial for WorldDP’s success? 

While the hierarchical unification of world-model planning with DP’s low-level execution and object-centric representations forms the backbone of WorldDP, we also evaluate the individual contri-butions of the PF optimizer and the Contact Predictor (CP) by testing two variants: “w/o PF” (using CEM instead) and “w/o CP.” As shown in Fig. 6, both modifications degrade performance, with the CP’s omission causing a substantial success rate drop, underscoring its vital role. 

4.3 Qualitative Visualizations 

Task Execution. We show an example of the execution for the Scene-Single-Composite task in Fig. 7. Given the start and target frames, the framework optimizes latent actions relative to button embeddings (planning step 1), producing subgoals 1A and 1B, which the low-level DP executes. Using the resulting frame as a new starting state, planning step 2 optimizes for the drawer and window embeddings to generate subgoals 2A and 2B for DP execution. This hierarchical approach successfully decomposes complex, multi-stage tasks into structured planning phases, enabling the low-level policy to solve the full horizon. Additional visualizations are in the appendix. 11 (a) Cube-Single (b) Cube-Triple (c) Scene-Single 

Figure 8: Object-Centric Encoding Visualization. Left: image; Right: pred. masks from OCE emb. 

Figure 9: Open-Loop Trajectory Rollouts. Given the initial state and an action sequence, we show predicted future states over a 4-second horizon. Latent states are decoded into images for visualization. Predicted frames are subsampled in the figure due to space constraints. 

OCE predictions. We provide qualitative examples of the predicted slot masks ˆmk in Fig. 8. Because our OCE operates directly on the patch-level features of a frozen DINOv2 backbone, the training constrain these masks to achieve patch-level, rather than pixel-level, accuracy. Consequently, the resulting qualitative visualizations naturally exhibit coarser, block-like mask boundaries that encapsulate each object of interest. More visualizations are in the appendix. 

World Model Rollouts. Finally, we present an open-loop rollout example on the Cube-Triple dataset in Fig. 9. Given an initial frame and a sequence of ground-truth actions, the world model generates a predicted trajectory. By comparing the world model’s predicted trajectory against ground-truth actions, we confirm its accurate simulation capabilities. Note that while our world model operates in the latent object-embedding space, we use a separate Transformer-based decoder (exclusive to visualization) to reconstruct these latents into images. Further visualizations are available in the Appendix. 

# 5 Research Impact and Limitations 

We present WorldDP, a novel framework that improves how agents plan and execute multi-stage tasks. By combining a high-level world model with a low-level diffusion policy, our method outperforms existing baselines. Further, the use of particle filters is new for planning using world models and improves performance as it fits into the multi-modal nature of robotic tasks. Despite WorldDP’s success in multi-stage robotics, some limitations remain. Relying on image-based goals can be restrictive, and future work could explore language-based alternatives. Furthermore, our sampling-based particle filter optimization is computationally intensive, requiring up to two minutes of test-time overhead at the start of the task; this could be mitigated by adopting gradient-based or parallelized optimization. Finally, while we currently use random frame sampling during training, implementing smarter sampling strategies could further enhance performance. 

# 6 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced WorldDP, a hierarchical world model framework tailored for multi-stage robotic tasks. WorldDP leverages an object-centric world model as a high-level planner to decompose complex 12 sequential tasks into simpler subgoals, which are subsequently executed by a low-level diffusion policy. To optimize these subgoals during planning, we integrated a particle filter alongside a contact prediction loss. Extensive evaluations across four diverse task settings demonstrate that WorldDP consistently outperforms existing baselines. Ultimately, our findings underscore the power of unifying long-term world model planning with robust, short-term diffusion policies to achieve superior generalization. We hope these insights inspire further research at the intersection of world models and robotics, with possible extensions of our work being in scaling model capacity and cross-embodiment learning. 

# References 

Mahmoud Assran, Quentin Duval, Ishan Misra, Piotr Bojanowski, Pascal Vincent, Michael Rabbat, Yann LeCun, and Nicolas Ballas. Self-supervised learning from images with a joint-embedding predictive ar-chitecture. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 15619–15629, 2023. Mido Assran, Adrien Bardes, David Fan, Quentin Garrido, Russell Howes, Matthew Muckley, Ammar Rizvi, Claire Roberts, Koustuv Sinha, Artem Zholus, et al. V-jepa 2: Self-supervised video models enable understanding, prediction and planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09985 , 2025. Yutong Bai, Danny Tran, Amir Bar, Yann LeCun, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Whole-body condi-tioned egocentric video prediction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:164375–164418, 2026. Amir Bar, Gaoyue Zhou, Danny Tran, Trevor Darrell, and Yann LeCun. Navigation world models. In 

Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp. 15791–15801, 2025. Adrien Bardes, Quentin Garrido, Jean Ponce, Xinlei Chen, Michael Rabbat, Yann LeCun, Mahmoud Assran, and Nicolas Ballas. Revisiting feature prediction for learning visual representations from video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08471 , 2024. Johan Bjorck, Fernando Castañeda, Nikita Cherniadev, Xingye Da, Runyu Ding, Linxi Fan, Yu Fang, Dieter Fox, Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang, et al. Gr00t n1: An open foundation model for generalist humanoid robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14734 , 2025. Arthur E. Bryson, Jr. and Yu-Chi Ho. Applied Optimal Control: Optimization, Estimation, and Control .Blaisdell Publishing Company, Waltham, MA, 1969. Jun Cen, Chaohui Yu, Hangjie Yuan, Yuming Jiang, Siteng Huang, Jiayan Guo, Xin Li, Yibing Song, Hao Luo, Fan Wang, et al. Worldvla: Towards autoregressive action world model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.21539 , 2025. Matthew Chang and Saurabh Gupta. One-shot visual imitation via attributed waypoints and demonstration augmentation. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 5055– 5062. IEEE, 2023. Chang Chen, Fei Deng, Kenji Kawaguchi, Caglar Gulcehre, and Sungjin Ahn. Simple hierarchical planning with diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02644 , 2024. Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Siyuan Feng, Eric Cousineau, Yilun Du, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, and Shuran Song. Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 44(10-11):1684–1704, 2025. Jinwoo Choi, Sang-Hyun Lee, and Seung-Woo Seo. Chain-of-goals hierarchical policy for long-horizon offline goal-conditioned rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.03389 , 2026. Jonathan Collu, Riccardo Majellaro, Aske Plaat, and Thomas M Moerland. Slot structured world models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03326 , 2024. 13 Tal Daniel and Aviv Tamar. Unsupervised image representation learning with deep latent particles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15821 , 2022. Tal Daniel, Carl Qi, Dan Haramati, Amir Zadeh, Chuan Li, Aviv Tamar, Deepak Pathak, and David Held. Latent particle world models: Self-supervised object-centric stochastic dynamics modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.04553 , 2026. Stefan Elfwing, Eiji Uchibe, and Kenji Doya. Sigmoid-weighted linear units for neural network function approximation in reinforcement learning. Neural networks , 107:3–11, 2018. Paolo Falcone, Francesco Borrelli, H Eric Tseng, Jahan Asgari, and Davor Hrovat. A hierarchical model predictive control framework for autonomous ground vehicles. In 2008 American Control Conference , pp. 3719–3724. IEEE, 2008. Kuan Fang, Yuke Zhu, Animesh Garg, Silvio Savarese, and Li Fei-Fei. Dynamics learning with cascaded variational inference for multi-step manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.13395 , 2019. Raktim Gautam Goswami, Amir Bar, David Fan, Tsung-Yen Yang, Gaoyue Zhou, Prashanth Krishnamurthy, Michael Rabbat, Farshad Khorrami, and Yann LeCun. World models can leverage human videos for dexterous manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13644 , 2025. David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122 , 2(3):440, 2018. Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse control tasks through world models. Nature , 640(8059):647–653, 2025. Nick Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. Td-mpc2: Scalable, robust world models for continuous control. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pp. 47376–47405, 2024. Dan Haramati, Carl Qi, Tal Daniel, Amy Zhang, Aviv Tamar, and George Konidaris. Hierarchical entity-centric reinforcement learning with factored subgoal diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02722 , 2026. Bohan Hou, Gen Li, Jindou Jia, Tuo An, Xinying Guo, Sicong Leng, Haoran Geng, Yanjie Ze, Tatsuya Harada, Philip Torr, et al. World model for robot learning: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.00080 , 2026. Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, et al. Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. Yann LeCun. A path towards autonomous machine intelligence version 0.9. 2, 2022-06-27. Open Review , 62 (1):1–62, 2022. Tianyu Li, Roberto Calandra, Deepak Pathak, Yuandong Tian, Franziska Meier, and Akshara Rai. Planning in learned latent action spaces for generalizable legged locomotion. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,6(2):2682–2689, 2021. Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold, Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot attention. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:11525–11538, 2020. Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101 ,2017. Lucas Maes, Quentin Le Lidec, Dan Haramati, Nassim Massaudi, Damien Scieur, Yann LeCun, and Randall Balestriero. stable-worldmodel-v1: Reproducible world modeling research and evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.08968 , 2026a. Lucas Maes, Quentin Le Lidec, Damien Scieur, Yann LeCun, and Randall Balestriero. Leworldmodel: Stable end-to-end joint-embedding predictive architecture from pixels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.19312 , 2026b. 14 R Chris Miall and Daniel M Wolpert. Forward models for physiological motor control. Neural networks , 9 (8):1265–1279, 1996. Malte Mosbach, Jan Niklas Ewertz, Angel Villar-Corrales, and Sven Behnke. Sold: Slot object-centric latent dynamics models for relational manipulation learning from pixels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.08822 , 2024. Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al. Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 , 2023. Seohong Park, Kevin Frans, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Sergey Levine. Ogbench: Benchmarking offline goal-conditioned rl. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pp. 94937–94982, 2025. Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, et al. pi0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054 , 2025. Michael Psenka, Michael Rabbat, Aditi Krishnapriyan, Yann LeCun, and Amir Bar. Parallel stochastic gradient-based planning for world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.00475 , 2026. Carl Qi, Dan Haramati, Tal Daniel, Aviv Tamar, and Amy Zhang. Ec-diffuser: Multi-object manipulation via entity-centric behavior generation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pp. 74835–74858, 2025. Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Roman Rädle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, et al. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2025, pp. 28085–28128, 2025. Seyed Sadegh Mohseni Salehi, Deniz Erdogmus, and Ali Gholipour. Tversky loss function for image seg-mentation using 3d fully convolutional deep networks. In International workshop on machine learning in medical imaging , pp. 379–387. Springer, 2017. Krishnakant Singh, Simone Schaub-Meyer, and Stefan Roth. Glass: Guided latent slot diffusion for object-centric learning. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference , pp. 28673– 28683, 2025. Leslie N Smith and Nicholay Topin. Super-convergence: Very fast training of neural networks using large learning rates. In Artificial intelligence and machine learning for multi-domain operations applications ,volume 11006, pp. 369–386. SPIE, 2019. Uladzislau Sobal, Wancong Zhang, Kyunghyun Cho, Randall Balestriero, Tim GJ Rudner, and Yann LeCun. Learning from reward-free offline data: A case for planning with latent dynamics models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:43905–43941, 2026. Basile Terver, Tsung-Yen Yang, Jean Ponce, Adrien Bardes, and Yann LeCun. What drives success in physical planning with joint-embedding predictive world models? arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.24497 , 2025. Daniel M Wolpert, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Michael I Jordan. An internal model for sensorimotor integra-tion. Science , 269(5232):1880–1882, 1995. Daniel M Wolpert, R Chris Miall, and Mitsuo Kawato. Internal models in the cerebellum. Trends in cognitive sciences , 2(9):338–347, 1998. Ziyi Wu, Nikita Dvornik, Klaus Greff, Thomas Kipf, and Animesh Garg. Slotformer: Unsupervised visual dynamics simulation with object-centric models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.05861 , 2022. Seonghyeon Ye, Yunhao Ge, Kaiyuan Zheng, Shenyuan Gao, Sihyun Yu, George Kurian, Suneel Indupuru, You Liang Tan, Chuning Zhu, Jiannan Xiang, et al. World action models are zero-shot policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15922 , 2026. 15 Wancong Zhang, Basile Terver, Artem Zholus, Soham Chitnis, Harsh Sutaria, Mido Assran, Randall Balestriero, Amir Bar, Adrien Bardes, Yann LeCun, et al. Hierarchical planning with latent world models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.03208 , 2026. Gaoyue Zhou, Hengkai Pan, Yann LeCun, and Lerrel Pinto. Dino-wm: World models on pre-trained visual features enable zero-shot planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04983 , 2024. 

# A Model Hyperparameter 

A.1 Object-Centric Encoder 

The object-centric encoder parameters for each of the datasets is shown in Table 4. For Cube-Single, the three slots correspond to the robot, the background, and the cube. In Cube-Triple, the five slots represent the robot, the background, and the three cubes, while for Scene-Single, the seven slots account for the robot, background, drawer, two buttons, window, and cube. Models for all datasets are trained for 10 epochs with a batch size of 64. Optimization is performed using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with an initial learning rate of 10 −3, which is decayed to 10 −6 via a one-cycle learning rate scheduler with cosine annealing (Smith & Topin, 2019). Table 4: Hyperparameter configurations for the Object-Centric Encoder. 

Slot Corrector Slot Decoder Dataset Num Slots Slot Dim. Num. iter. Hidden Dim. Layers Hidden Dim. 

Cube-Single 3 64 3 128 3 384 Cube-Triple 5 128 3 128 3 384 Scene-Single 7 1024 3 128 3 384 

A.2 Conditional Diffusion Transformer Dynamics Prediction Model. 

As detailed in Section 3.2, the CDiT takes object-centric states as input; thus, its input dimension matches the slot dimension of each respective dataset. All other CDiT parameters are held constant across datasets, featuring a depth of 12, 4 attention heads, and an MLP ratio of 2.0. The transformer-based action encoder maps the 5-dimensional physical action space to a 32-dimensional latent action space, utilizing a hidden dimension of 256, a depth of 3, and 4 attention heads. Models for all datasets are trained for 10 epochs with a batch size of 128. Optimization is performed using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with an initial learning rate of 10 −4, which is decayed to 10 −7 via a one-cycle learning rate scheduler with cosine annealing (Smith & Topin, 2019). 

A.3 Diffusion Policy. 

Apart from the input dimension, which scales with the slot dimension and the number of slots, all other parameters of the diffusion policy transformer remain constant across datasets. Specifically, we use a pre-diction horizon of 40, a depth of 8, 4 attention heads, and a hidden dimension of 256. For all datasets, models are trained for 3 epochs with a batch size of 48. Optimization is performed using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with an initial learning rate of 10 −4 and a weight decay of 10 −6.

A.4 Contact Predictor 

The contact predictor consists of two linear layers separated by a SiLU activation function (Elfwing et al., 2018). It takes the mean of the DINOv2 patch-level representations as input and outputs a vector corre-sponding to the number of manipulable objects in the environment: 1 for Cube-Single, 3 for Cube-Triple, and 5 for Scene-Single. Across all datasets, the model is trained for 10 epochs with a batch size of 256. 16 Optimization is performed using the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with an initial learning rate of 10 −3, which decays to 10 −6 via a one-cycle learning rate scheduler with cosine annealing (Smith & Topin, 2019). 

# B Tversky Loss 

As described in Section 3.1, to supervise predicted masks during object-centric encoder training, we employ the Tversky loss function (Salehi et al., 2017). Given predicted ( ˆmk) and ground-truth ( mk) masks, the Tversky loss is formulated as: 

Ltv = 1 − T P + ϵT P + αF N + βF P + ϵ (5) where T P = ∑ ˆmkmk represents true positives, F P = ∑ ˆmk(1 −mk) false positives, and F N = ∑(1 − ˆmk)mk

false negatives. The hyperparameters α = 0 .99 and β = 0 .01 are used to control the trade-off between false positives and false negatives, with ϵ = 10 −6 for numerical stability. To further prioritize small objects, we apply an inverse-size weighting scheme, scaling each object’s loss contribution by (1 /size )temperature (with temperature = 0 .2) and normalizing these weights across the batch. 

# C Planning Parameters 

The hyperparameter choices utilized for the particle-filter-based trajectory optimization across all datasets are detailed in Table 5, where T denotes the planning horizon, Q is the total number of particles, σ represents the action-sampling standard deviation, M is the elite size (number of top candidates selected for resampling), 

L signifies the number of optimization iterations, and λplan balances the cost objectives. Moreover, as mentioned in the main text, for Cube-Triple, we run and execute the optimization with respect to each cube sequentially; for Scene-Single-Composite, we first optimize with respect to the button entities and subsequently with respect to the drawer and window components. Table 5: Optimization hyperparameters for the Particle Filter planner across different datasets. 

Dataset T Q σ M L λplan 

Cube-Single 3 600 1.0 10 20 0.1 Cube-Triple 3 600 0.5 10 10 0.05 Scene-Single-Direct 2 600 0.1 10 10 0.1 Scene-Single-Composite 2 600 0.1 10 10 0.1 

# D Success Rate Calculation 

Cube-Single. A trial is considered successful if the Euclidean distance between the current cube position and its target position is within 12 cm at the end of the episode. 

Cube-Triple. This metric extends the single-cube condition to a multi-object setting, requiring the final Euclidean distance for each of the three cubes to be within 12 cm of its respective target position simulta-neously. 

Scene-Single-Direct. Success is achieved if all binary button states match their target configurations, and the final positions of the drawer and window handles are within 4 cm and 3 cm of their respective target coordinates. 

Scene-Single-Composite. This task shares the identical completion criteria as Scene-Single-Direct, re-quiring correct binary button states alongside precise positioning of both the drawer and window handles. 17 E Baseline Implementation Additional Details 

DinoWM. To ensure a fair comparison, all core model parameters are preserved while modifying the training data sequence to a horizon of 100 frames (matching WorldDP) with action chunks of size 25. Planning utilizes a receding-horizon approach with a 2-step execution window per optimization. The total planning budget varies by task complexity: 4 steps for Cube-Single and Scene-Single-Direct (re-planning once after executing the first 2 steps), 12 steps for Cube-Triple, and 8 steps for Scene-Single-Composite. Following the Cube-Single configuration in Maes et al. (2026b), the CEM optimizer runs for 10 iterations per step, sampling 300 candidates and selecting the top 30 elites. 

LeWM. Model hyperparameters match the original Cube-Single implementation. Training horizons, action chunking, and receding-horizon planning setups are identical to those described for DinoWM above. 

HECRL ∗. The architecture closely mirrors the original implementation, with three modifications: HECRL’s low-level RL controller is replaced by our goal-conditioned DP, it is trained using single-view images, and it receives the same budget of environment feedback as WorldDP as specified in the main text. 

DP. All implementation and architectural details are as described in the main text and the diffusion policy overview in Section A.3. 

# F Additional Visualizations 

Task Execution. Along with the visualization of Scene-Single-Composite in Section 4.3, we show task execution visualizations for Cube-Single, Scene-Single-Direct, and Cube-Triple in Figure 10. 

OCE Predictions. Additional visualizations for predicted masks for each of the datasets are shown in Figures 11, 12, and 13. 

World Model Rollouts. Additional rollout visualizations for each dataset are shown in Figure 14. 18 (a) Cube-Single (b) Scene-Single-Direct 

> (c) Cube-Triple

Figure 10: Task Execution Examples. Given the initial and target states, our framework decomposes the task into sequential planning phases, with each finding a set of subgoals, which are reached using the diffusion policy.   

> (a) (b) (c)

Figure 11: Object-Centric Encoding Visualization for Cube-Single. Left: image; Right: predicted masks from OCE embeddings   

> (a) (b) (c)

Figure 12: Object-Centric Encoding Visualization for Cube-Triple. Left: image; Right: predicted masks from OCE embeddings 19 (a) (b) (c) 

Figure 13: Object-Centric Encoding Visualization for Scene-Single. Left: image; Right: predicted masks from OCE embeddings 

> (a) Cube-Single
> (b) Cube-Triple
> (c) Scene-Single

Figure 14: Open-Loop Trajectory Rollouts. Given the initial state and an action sequence, we show future states over a 4-second horizon. Latent states are decoded into images for visualization. Predicted frames are subsampled in the figure due to space constraints. 20